In addition to transcriptomics differences between fibroblast subsets enriched in early versus late gestation, we observed differences within the WNT2 + fibroblast population across gestation time (Extended Data Fig. 1d). Late gestation WNT2 + fibroblasts had upregulated genes related to extracellular matrix and collagen deposition (for example, COL1A1), whereas early WNT2 + fibroblasts had DEGs involved in cellular growth and differentiation (for example, SFRP1) (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 7d and Supplementary Tables 16-18). Notably, WNT2 + and PEAR1 + prenatal fibroblasts expressed several genes involved in cellular senescence (CDKN1A), cytokine pathways (for example, IL1R1) and collagen deposition (for example, POSTN) (Fig. 3a,b), which are highly expressed in pathogenic fibroblasts of fibrotic skin disorders 53 . These results provide further support for our finding of progressive acquisition of scar-promoting genes in later gestation, consistent with the clinical observation of scarring in third trimester skin 54 . 

The role of macrophages in promoting wound healing has been described in postnatal mouse skin and in adult human skin 55 . In prenatal skin, macrophage subsets (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f) were predicted to co-locate with fibroblasts, neural cells and vascular cells in distinct tissue microenvironments in early gestation (Fig. 1d). Specifically, LYVE1 + macrophages co-located with WNT2 + fibroblasts (Fig. 3c-e) and were predicted to interact through platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and corresponding receptors (PDGFRα and PDGFRβ) expressed on fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8). Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart 56 .

Prenatal human skin is able to heal without scarring but loses this capacity after 24 PCW 50 . Scars result from aggregation of collagen produced by dermal fibroblasts and failure of the overlying epidermis to completely regenerate 51 . To identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms that may endow early prenatal skin with scarless healing properties, we investigated the temporal changes in composition and transcriptional profile of the dermal fibroblast subsets (Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7a). We first compared prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts with healthy adult skin fibroblasts 10 . All adult fibroblast subsets expressed high levels of inflammatory cytokines and receptors (for example, IL6 and IL1RA) and genes involved in antigen presentation (for example, HLA-A), innate immune and inflammatory responses (for example, CD55 and PTGES) and cellular senescence (CDKN1A) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13-15). By contrast, prenatal skin fibroblasts had upregulated genes involved in immune suppression (CD200), regulation of inflammation (for example, RAMP2) and tissue regeneration (MDK) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13-15). 

The adult fibroblast gene expression profile was increased in WNT2 + and PEAR1 + prenatal fibroblasts, which were abundant in later gestation (Fig. 3a and Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7b). Genes associated with a pro-inflammatory fibroblast phenotype (APOE, IGFBP7 and ITM2A) 43,52 were also upregulated during the transition from HOXC5 + fibroblasts into PEAR1 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7c). In addition to transcriptomics differences between fibroblast subsets enriched in early versus late gestation, we observed differences within the WNT2 + fibroblast population across gestation time (Extended Data Fig. 1d).

A combination of fibroblast and macrophage-associated molecular features potentially contribute to the ability of prenatal skin to heal without scarring, including the presence of fibroblast progenitors, a downregulated immune milieu and reduced collagen expression. However, we found progressive 'ageing' and acquisition of the adult 'pro-inflammatory' phenotype as early as 9 PCW, which could be targeted in fibroblasts to guide postnatal scarless healing. Future studies that align human fibroblast subsets across the lifespan are required to investigate the dynamics of scarless healing and the roles of mechanical forces, microbiota and environmental exposure on fibroblast functions. 

Our prenatal human skin atlas represents a valuable resource to explore genes that cause congenital hair and skin disorders and is freely accessible from our web portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/ fetal-skin). We found that implicated genes are indeed expressed during prenatal skin development and HF differentiation, thereby supporting an in utero origin for these disorders. Our systematic prenatal skin-SkO comparison provides a blueprint to guide more faithful in vitro SkO generation, which can facilitate future studies of interactions with the microbiota, the pathogenesis of congenital skin disorders, and hair and skin engineering for therapeutic applications, including hair regeneration and skin transplant.

Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart 56 . Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1-IGF1R and GRN-EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1 + macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts. 

We recently identified yolk-sac derived TREM2 + macrophages that share an expression profile (P2RY12, CX3CR1 and OLFML3) with microglia-like macrophages from other developing organs, such as the brain, prenatal skin and gonads 57,58 (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f). Prenatal skin TREM2 + microglia-like (TML) macrophages were highly correlated with embryonic brain microglia 57 (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b) and co-expressed immunomodulatory genes, including immune-inhibitory receptors (for example, CX3CR1) and regulators of IL-6 production (for example, SYT11) 59 (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 19-23). Downregulation of inflammation and IL-6 confers anti-fibrogenic properties in mouse skin transplants and in fetal wounds 60,61 . TML macrophages were predicted to co-locate with WNT2 + fibroblasts in early prenatal skin (6-8 PCW) (Fig. 3c,d) and WNT2 + fibroblasts had downregulated IL6 expression compared with adult fibroblasts (Fig. 3a). This led us to infer a potential contribution of macrophages in scarless healing in prenatal skin. Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1 + macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair 62,63 .

genes before 11 PCW 5 suggests that antigen presentation may not be a key function of human macrophages during early gestation. Together with evidence of their role in tissue homeostasis 6,7 and healing in mouse models 8,9 , this raises the question of whether macrophages contribute to human early skin morphogenesis. 

Our current study provides a comprehensive multi-omics cell atlas of 7-17 PCW human prenatal skin. We profiled human prenatal skin using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), spatial transcriptomics and multiplex RNA in situ hybridization to decode the dynamic cellular and molecular changes across gestation that regulate skin and HF morphogenesis. We leveraged adult healthy skin and HF datasets 10,11 to compare and assess developmental-specific features that contribute to scarless skin healing and cues that guide de novo HF formation. We used a hair-bearing SkO model 1 to validate the role of macrophages in prenatal skin vascular network formation.