Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation 1 . Within the dermal compartment, we observed HF-specialized fibroblasts, the dermal condensate (Dc) and dermal papilla (Dp), from 12 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c). 

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs 20 (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (T reg ) cells 21 , and in control of autoimmunity (CD24) 22 . This result highlighted the potential role of T reg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). T reg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin 23,24 . , adult healthy skin 10 and hair-bearing SkO 1 were integrated for comparison. Spatial experiments were carried out using RNAscope, immunofluorescence and Visium analyses. Findings of the study were functionally validated using a SkO co-culture. b, Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization of the prenatal skin dataset with broad annotation of cell states, as denoted by colour and number in the legend. c, Milo beeswarm plot showing the differential abundance of neighbourhoods in prenatal skin across gestation time, annotated by broad cell labels. Red and blue neighbourhoods are significantly enriched in earlier or later gestation, respectively. Colour intensity denotes degree of significance. d, Dotplot showing spatial microenvironments (MEs). Cell type to microenvironment coefficients are normalized by cell type sums, and cell type to microenvironment assignment is shown by colour. ME5, which shows co-locating macrophages and endothelial cells, is highlighted (grey).

A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2 + basal, POSTN + basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g). The same analysis was performed to obtain the top 10 interactions in SkO HFs (Extended Data Fig. 5c), defining early/late to match corresponding cell states as in prenatal skin. The top 10 interactions identified in prenatal skin HFs were also plotted within the SkO data to highlight similarities and differences between the two (Fig. 2g). 

Comparison with adult fibroblasts. Integrated scRNA-seq data from prenatal skin and adult healthy skin (with original annotations) 10 was subsetted to the cell group of interest (fibroblasts). DEGs between the adult and prenatal skin fibroblasts were derived using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test implementation in scanpy and adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (scanpy.tl.rank_genes_ groups, method = "wilcoxon", corr_method = "benjamini-hochberg"). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the top 1,000 genes in each group ranked by scores (Supplementary Table 13) and the implementation of the Enrichr workflow 102 in the Python package GSEApy (https://gseapy.readthedocs.io/; v.0.10.7) with Gene Ontology Biological Process (2021) as the query database (Supplementary Tables 14, 15). A selected list of genes was plotted to highlight differences between prenatal and adult skin fibroblasts. 

Gene set enrichment analysis.

Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). NMF can predict significant cellular co-locations that are not readily evident in conventional histopathology analyses 5,15 . Our analysis predicted distinct microenvironments in prenatal skin comprising epidermal, dermal, vascular and neural cells, each including specific types of immune cells (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in 'early and late neurovascular microenvironments' (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation. 

We next integrated and compared human prenatal and adult skin data 10 with the SkO model 1 . The aim was to determine the extent to which the SkO model recapitulates human skin differentiation at a molecular level and its potential utility to functionally assess the role of immune cells in skin morphogenesis (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a,b). Broadly, cell states were conserved among SkO, prenatal and adult skin, but SkO cell states matched prenatal skin more closely than adult skin across culture duration (Extended Data Fig. 2c,d and Supplementary Table 5). However, the tempo of differentiation varied across the distinct skin cell lineages. Even after 19 weeks of culture, fibroblasts, mural and Schwann cells had a low probability of correspondence to adult skin cell states (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5).

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA + FOXD1 + SOX2 low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1 + SOX2 + ), which abuts the epithelial hair placode 26,28 . Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin 28,29 . Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP + , SOX2 + ) 26,28 (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h). 

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB + fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5 + early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2 + fibroblasts and PEAR1 + fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).