Consistent with our histological observations, we identified HF cells from 14 PCW in our scRNA-seq data, which comprised placode, matrix (SHH+), outer root sheath (ORS) (SLC26A7+), companion layer (CL), inner root sheath (IRS) and cuticle and cortex cells (cuticle/cortex; part of the inner layers of the HF) (Fig. 2a–c, Extended Data Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Table 6). In addition, we observed immature and mature interfollicular epidermal (IFE) cells. Immature IFE cells, including periderm, immature basal and immature suprabasal cells, were present from 7 PCW and decreased after 11 PCW, during the transition from embryonic to fetal skin (Fig. 2b). Mature basal (DPYSL2+) and suprabasal IFE cells increased after 11 PCW, whereas POSTN+ basal cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3b). Sebaceous and apocrine gland cells, which mature after 16 PCW, were not captured at these stages.

Human skin organogenesis begins after gastrulation from two primary germ layers. The epidermis, the most superficial layer of the skin, melanocytes and neural cells arise from the ectoderm. The dermis, which is separated from the epidermis by the basement membrane and contains endothelial and mural cells, derives from the mesoderm (apart from facial and cranial skin, where it arises from ectoderm-derived neural crest cells). The skin appendages, which include hair follicles (HFs) and sebaceous glands, form in a cephalocaudal direction. Prenatal HFs start forming between 11 and 14 post-conception weeks (PCW), initiated by interactions between epidermal placodes (focal sites of epidermal layer thickening) and dermal condensates (aggregates of dermal fibroblasts), whereas sebaceous glands develop from around 16 PCW.

By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the SkO model recapitulated the different components of prenatal skin HF, interfollicular epidermis, neural cells and dermal fibroblasts, but immune cells were not represented and endothelial cells were markedly reduced.

Innate immune cells, such as macrophages and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), were present from early gestation, whereas B cells and T cells emerged later, accompanying thymus, bone marrow and spleen formation from around 10 PCW (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Some subsets of macrophages, ILCs and fibroblasts exhibited distinct gene expression profiles between early and late gestation, which suggested that functional maturation or dual waves of production occur during development (Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 1d).

Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in ‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’ (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation.

Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14–15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a).

Our prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset comprised 534,581 cells, of which 433,961 cells passed quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1b). Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3). Differential abundance analysis testing revealed how different cell populations varied across gestation. Among ectoderm-derived cells, neural cells and the periderm, which constitutes the first skin permeability barrier, were enriched in early gestation, whereas suprabasal epidermal and HF cells were mainly observed in later gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Mesoderm-derived cells, including skin fibroblasts and endothelial cells, and immune cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4).

Cells were then incubated overnight at 4 °C on a shaker (65 r.p.m.) with the first primary antibody, anti-CD45 (1:100, clone YAML501.4, ThermoFisher) for macrophages, for 48 h. The morning after, cells were washed and then incubated with the first secondary antibody overnight (goat anti-rat IgG, Alexa Fluor Plus 647, ThermoFisher). The morning after, SkOs were washed and incubated with the second primary antibody, anti-CD31 (1:100, clone JC70A, Dako) for endothelial cells for 48 h. The SkOs were then washed and incubated with the second secondary antibody (goat anti-mouse IgG1, Alexa Fluor 568, ThermoFisher) and DAPI overnight on a shaker. Cells were washed and placed in 50% glycerol for 30 min on a shaker at room temperature. Cells were then transferred to 70% glycerol overnight on a shaker at room temperature. The following morning, the co-culture was mounted and imaged using a custom 4-camera spinning disk confocal microscope.

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29). Inferred trajectory analysis showed that early endothelial cells in prenatal skin differentiated into either an arteriolar pathway (capillaries, capillary arterioles and arterioles) or venular pathway (postcapillary venules and venules), with expression of characteristic genes (for example, GJA5 for arteriolar and PLVAP for venular) (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a–c). Unlike SkO capillary arteriole cells, prenatal skin capillary arteriole cells could further differentiate into arterioles (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a).

Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN+ basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

There is, however, a paucity of information about the precise cellular composition of human prenatal skin over these developmental periods and whether cells interact in functional microanatomical niches that support skin morphogenesis.

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (Treg) cells, and in control of autoimmunity (CD24). This result highlighted the potential role of Treg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). Treg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin,. RNAscope (FOXP3+) and immunofluorescence staining (FOXP3+) showed that Treg cells were primarily located within and around HFs compared to interfollicular skin as early as 15 PCW (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3g,h).

We next integrated and compared human prenatal and adult skin data with the SkO model. The aim was to determine the extent to which the SkO model recapitulates human skin differentiation at a molecular level and its potential utility to functionally assess the role of immune cells in skin morphogenesis (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a,b). Broadly, cell states were conserved among SkO, prenatal and adult skin, but SkO cell states matched prenatal skin more closely than adult skin across culture duration (Extended Data Fig. 2c,d and Supplementary Table 5). However, the tempo of differentiation varied across the distinct skin cell lineages. Even after 19 weeks of culture, fibroblasts, mural and Schwann cells had a low probability of correspondence to adult skin cell states (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5).

Although we note similarities between human and mouse in the signalling pathways co-ordinating HF formation, our study reveals key cross-species distinctions in the differentiation tempo of HF mesenchymal cells. Future studies are required to fully delineate the features that distinguish human skin development.

The Dc, for which formation is accompanied by invagination of the placode, expressed FAM3C and EFNB1, which were, respectively, predicted to interact with LAMP1 or CXADR and EPHB6 on the placode, and have been reported to promote cell migration and invasion, (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8). Finally, RSPO3 from the Dp was predicted to interact with LGR4 and LGR6 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8) in overlying matrix cells to contribute to the proliferation of HF epithelial cells. Notably, the highlighted interactions were conserved between the mesenchymal and epithelial cells of the SkO model for corresponding stages during HF formation (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 8). These results provide orthogonal validation of our findings and reinforce the utility of the SkO as an accurate model of prenatal skin development.

We next investigated additional mechanisms for failed expansion and differentiation of SkO endothelial cells. Expression of genes and gene modules related to blood flow and hypoxia were lower in SkO than in prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 10e,f and Supplementary Table 29). However, sprouting angiogenesis potential, assessed by scoring the ‘tip’ cell state, was increased in both SkO capillary arteriole cells and prenatal skin arteriole, capillary arteriole and capillary cells (Extended Data Fig. 10g,h). This suggests that despite strong expression of the sprouting angiogenesis gene signature, SkO capillary arteriole cells are unable to guide stalk cells for new blood vessel formation.

Inferred trajectory and pseudotime analysis of epidermal cells in the integrated prenatal skin and SkO data predicted the differentiation of POSTN+ basal cells into two paths: ORS/CL trajectory, comprising DPYSL2+ basal cells, ORS and CL; and IRS trajectory, involving placode, matrix, cuticle/cortex and IRS (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 7). Along the ORS/CL trajectory, we identified new genes upregulated by DPYSL2+ basal cells, such as AGR2, and previously reported genes related to ORS differentiation (BARX2 and SOX9), (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). AGR2 was downregulated along the IRS trajectory, whereas known matrix markers such as SHH and WNT10B, were upregulated (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). Loss of AGR2, which functions in the assembly of cysteine-rich receptors enriched in HFs, promotes cell migration.

To explore inferred interactions between macrophage subsets and endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 9a), we aggregated the interactions predicted for each macrophage subset and the different subtypes of endothelial cells (early endothelial cells, arterioles, capillary arterioles, capillaries, postcapillary venules and venules) by averaging the means and using the minimum of the adjusted P values as previously described. A curated list of aggregated interactions were plotted for visualization using ggplot2 (v.3.3.6). A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2+ basal, POSTN+ basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g).

In addition, we integrated new and published single-cell datasets of adult skin and of a hair-bearing SkO model derived from human embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells for comparative analysis (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 2). We also compared in vivo prenatal and organoid HFs with scRNA-seq data of adult HFs. Our data can be interactively explored through our WebAtlas-based portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-skin). The analysis software for this study is archived at Zenodo (10.5281/zenodo.8164271).

CellPhoneDB (v.3.0.0) package was used to infer cell–cell interactions within the prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset overall and in early/late gestation and within the SkO scRNA-seq dataset overall. In the overall analysis, we randomly subsampled each cell type into no more than 200 cells 3 separate times, using all cells if a population contained fewer than 200 cells and excluding populations with fewer than 10 cells. The subsampled dataset were analysed separately using the permutation-based method to establish significance (P value cut-off = 0.05). For the analysis by early/late gestation, the prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset was first split into early (≤11 PCW) and late (≥12 PCW) gestation datasets, which were then subsampled (no more than 200 cells per cell type) and individually analysed (P value cut-off = 0.05).

Prenatal skin cells and organoid cells were integrated using Harmony (v.0.0.5), treating datasets as batches (prenatal skin or organoid) and within dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal skin, strain for SkO, and 10x kit version for both datasets). Leiden clusters were annotated using known markers.

Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation. Within the dermal compartment, we observed HF-specialized fibroblasts, the dermal condensate (Dc) and dermal papilla (Dp), from 12 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c).

Target genes of interest were identified as DEGs between conditions (prenatal skin versus SkO) in receiver cells using FindMarkers function in NicheNet (adjusted P value ≤ 0.05 and average log2(fold change) > 0.25, expressed in at least 10% of endothelial cells). Background genes were all genes in the NicheNet model that were expressed in at least 10% of receiver cells.

We explored the mesenchymal–epithelial interactions that instruct early HF formation. Receptor–ligand analysis predicted interactions between CXCL12 expressed by pre-Dc cells (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h) with ACKR3 on epidermal basal cells (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Table 8). RNAscope analysis confirmed that these two genes co-located (Fig. 2h). This result suggests that CXCL12 probably interacts with ACKR3 to mediate the migration of pre-Dc cells,. Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand–receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12–CXCR4 and CXCL12–DPP4), (Extended Data Figs. 1f and 5a and Supplementary Table 8), which suggested that innate immune cells may support pre-Dc cell migration during early HF development. Additional experiments are required to functionally validate these interactions in prenatal hair formation.

TML macrophages were also predicted to co-locate with Schwann cells in prenatal skin (‘early neurovascular microenvironment’, ME1) (Figs. 1d and 3g) and expressed genes related to cell migration and neural development (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 22 and 23), which mirrored the functions of brain microglia and peripheral nerve-associated macrophages in mouse skin. TML macrophages were predicted to interact with Schwann cells, contributing to synapse formation and axon guidance (VEGFA–NRP1, VEGFA–NRP2, SEMA3C–NRP2 and SEMA3E–PLXND1) (Extended Data Fig. 8h and Supplementary Table 8). These findings suggest that prenatal skin macrophages may support the establishment of the skin peripheral nervous system during early gestation, as previously reported in mouse skin.

Successful co-culture with immune cells has been demonstrated in some organoid systems,. We identified a crucial role of macrophages in vascular network remodelling after adding macrophages to hair-bearing iPS cell-derived SkOs. Not only is this important for our understanding of the diverse cellular interactions that mediate morphogenesis but it also has practical implications for in vitro models, which commonly fail to vascularize. Our study provides further insights into human HF formation and the origin of the CL, which seems to develop along the same trajectory as the ORS. These findings are consistent with recent results from mouse studies,, which showed that CL development occurs before hair matrix formation and there is greater transcriptional similarity of CL cells to ORS cells.

This result suggests that for corresponding cell types, HF fibroblasts are in a more differentiated state in mouse compared to human prenatal skin. Additionally, dermal fibroblast differentiation into histologically defined subsets (papillary and reticular) has been reported to occur early in mice (about embryonic day 12.5). Our human prenatal skin fibroblasts did not significantly express papillary fibroblast markers (for example, COL13A1) (Extended Data Fig. 5j), which suggested that the distinction between papillary and reticular fibroblasts emerges after 17 PCW. These distinctions between human and mouse skin may be attributed to organismal differences in gestation lengths and tempo of differentiation. Cellular differentiation occurs at a quicker pace in mice, whereas the longer gestation period in humans permits more advanced maturation to take place in utero.

In this study, we characterized the dynamic composition of human prenatal skin during the early stages of de novo HF formation and highlighted the crucial skin immune and non-immune crosstalk that contributes to skin morphogenesis, results that are in line with emerging evidence in animal and human studies,. Our atlas indicated that macrophages contribute to scarless skin repair, fibroblast homeostasis and neurovascular development. This is in part contributed to by yolk-sac derived TML macrophages, which suggests that these cells have broader functions outside the central nervous system in early gestation. The presence of TML macrophages has previously been identified in several prenatal organs,,.

Single-staining was performed on cells with anti-CD206 antibody (1:200, PE, clone 19.2, ThermoFisher), anti-CD16 antibody (1:50, PE-Cyanine7, clone eBioCB16, ThermoFisher), anti-CD14 antibody (1:100, PerCP-Cyanine5.5, clone 61D3, ThermoFisher), anti-CD1c antibody (1:25, Pacific Blue, clone L161, BioLegend), anti-CD45 (1:300, BV480, clone HI30, BD Biosciences) and anti-human Lineage Cocktail (1:100, CD3, CD19, CD20, CD56, clones UCTH1, HIB19, 2H7, 5.1H11, BioLegend) on ice in the dark for 30 min. Before acquiring on the analyzer, cells were washed once in cell strained buffer and passed through a 35 µm filter (Falcon). Acquisition by flow cytometry was performed using a Cytek Aurora. Live single CD16+, CD14+, CD206+, CD45+, CD1c– and Lin– cells were analysed using FlowJo (v.10.9.0).

To quantify the area covered by endothelial cells in the 2D angiogenesis assay with and without macrophages, phase-contrast images of the wells at 24, 48 and 72 h of culture were analysed using the Fiji distribution of the ImageJ software (v.2.14.0). The endothelial area was estimated by measuring the area of the wells covered by all cells (that is, endothelial cells alone or endothelial cells with macrophages). To obtain the endothelial density (in per cent) the area covered by cells was measured in pixels after segmentation using intensity thresholding and normalized to the total imaged area (constant, 2,115,570 pixels).

Dissociated cells were stained with anti-CD45 antibody (1:20, PE, clone HI30, BD Biosciences (samples F220 and F221) or 1:33, BUV395, clone HI30, BD Biosciences (other sorted samples)) on ice in the dark for 30 min, except for one sample (F217) for which no cell sorting was performed. To improve capture of less abundant cell populations from the CD45– fraction, such as keratinocytes and endothelial cells, additional staining was carried out to separate them from the abundant CD34+ stromal cells in a subset of samples. For samples F220 and F221, anti-CD34 (1:25, APC/Cy7, clone 581, BioLegend) antibodies was used; for samples F69 and F71, additional staining included anti-CD34 (1:25, APC/Cy7, clone: 581, BioLegend) and anti-CD14 antibodies (1:33, PE-CF594, clone MφP9, BD Biosciences). Immediately before sorting, cells were passed through a 35 µm filter (Falcon), and DAPI (Sigma-Aldrich) was added at a final concentration of 3 μM.

Endothelial cells were derived from Kolf2.1S iPS cells cultured on Matrigel-coated plates in mTeSR1 medium with ROCK inhibitor at 4.5 × 104 cells per cm2. iPS cells were differentiated through lateral mesoderm into CD144+ endothelial cells as previously described. Macrophages and SkOs were also derived from Kolf2.1S iPS cells according to previously published methods,. The angiogenesis assay was carried out by culturing iPS cell-derived endothelial cells and macrophages separately or in co-culture in 15-well 3D chambered µ-slide (ibidi, 81506). This was done using a three-layered sandwich method, whereby layer one was 10 µl Matrigel (Corning, 354230), layer two was supplemented StemPro medium (Gibco, 10639011) + 10% Matrigel with and without the endothelial cells and layer three was supplemented StemPro medium with and without macrophages. The endothelial cells were left to settle for 4 h at 37 °C before addition of macrophages.

Prenatal skin interfaces with the amniotic fluid in a sterile environment. However, immune cells such as macrophages seed the skin as early as 6 PCW and express a range of pro-inflammatory genes, although genes relating to antigen presentation (for example, major histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII)) are only upregulated after 11 PCW. Decoupling of the expression of pro-inflammatory genes from MHCII genes before 11 PCW suggests that antigen presentation may not be a key function of human macrophages during early gestation. Together with evidence of their role in tissue homeostasis, and healing in mouse models,, this raises the question of whether macrophages contribute to human early skin morphogenesis.

Additional comparison with a human ES cell-derived and iPS cell-derived blood vessel organoid, which also lacked immune cells, further demonstrated the limited vasculature differentiation of this mesoderm-geared blood vessel organoid model (Extended Data Fig. 10d). This result confirms that immune cells are required to fully recapitulate in vivo endothelial cell development.

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA+FOXD1+SOX2low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1+SOX2+), which abuts the epithelial hair placode,. Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin,. Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP+, SOX2+), (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h).

The assay was imaged 2 h after initial culture and then every 24 h for 3 days using an EVOS 7000 microscope, and images were analysed using Fiji distribution of the ImageJ software (v.2.14.0). Before co-culture, iPS cell-derived macrophages were phenotyped using flow cytometry (Extended Data Fig. 11h). Macrophages were collected using TrypLE (Gibco) at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 5 min, and cells were collected by centrifugation (300g for 6 min). Cells were washed once with cell staining buffer (BioLegend) before cell counting and antibody staining. Nonspecific bindings were blocked using Human TruStain FcX (Fc receptor blocking solution, BioLegend) for 10 min on ice and then stained using a Fixable Blue Dead Cell Stain kit for 10 min on ice (1:500 in PBS, ThermoFisher). Cells were washed twice with cell staining buffer.

To locate cells identified from scRNA-seq data in situ, we performed Cell2location analysis of spatial transcriptomics data of facial and abdominal skin (10 PCW) and embryonic lower limb skin (6–8 PCW) (Supplementary Table 2). We assessed cell type co-location using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to computationally predict microenvironments in conjunction with correlation analyses. Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). NMF can predict significant cellular co-locations that are not readily evident in conventional histopathology analyses,. Our analysis predicted distinct microenvironments in prenatal skin comprising epidermal, dermal, vascular and neural cells, each including specific types of immune cells (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f).

The precise mechanisms of de novo HF formation in human embryonic development are largely inferred from mouse studies. Human studies have primarily focused on morphological descriptions during development or cycling HFs in adult skin. Our single-cell dataset captured the onset of HF formation, which enabled direct comparison between prenatal developing HFs and adult cycling HFs.

Images of haematoxylin and eosin-stained skin sections (Fig. 2a) were taken from 13 independent samples from the following gestational ages: 6 PCW (n = 1 and 3 sections), 8 PCW (n = 3), 11 PCW (n = 2), 14 PCW (n = 1 and 2 sections), 15 PCW (n = 4) and 17 PCW (n = 2).

To compare prenatal skin cells with external datasets (adult HF, embryonic macrophages, blood vessel organoid, reindeer skin),,,, the datasets were downsampled to have roughly balanced cell counts per annotated cell type before integration with Harmony (v.0.0.5), treating datasets as batches and within dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal skin, site for embryonic macrophages, group (cell line: day of culture) for blood vessel organoid, chemistry for reindeer skin).

Sorting by flow cytometry was performed with a BD FACSAria Fusion flow cytometer. The CD45+ fraction was sorted from the DAPI–CD45+ gate, and the CD45– fraction was sorted from the DAPI–CD45– gate. CD45 gating was contiguous so that no live cells were lost in sorting. Live CD45+ and CD45– cells were sorted into separate chilled FACS tubes coated with FBS. For samples F220 and F221, CD34+ and CD34– fractions were sorted from CD45–CD34+ and CD45–CD34– gates, respectively. For samples F69 and F71, in addition to the live CD45+ and CD45– cells, we isolated all cells from the CD45– fraction that were not within the CD34+CD14– gate and collected them into a separate chilled FACS tubes coated with FBS (Extended Data Fig. 1a).

We used NicheNet (v.1.1.1) to infer ligand–target gene links by combining scRNA-seq data (prenatal skin and SkO) of interacting cells (sender and receiver cells) with existing knowledge on signalling and gene regulatory networks. An open-source R implementation including integrated data sources used in the analysis are available at GitHub (https://github.com/saeyslab/nichenetr). NicheNet’s ligand–activity analysis first assesses and ranks ligands in the sender cell type (macrophage subsets), which best predict observed changes in expression of target genes of interest in the receiver cell types (endothelial cells) compared with background genes. Potential ligands were defined as all ligands in the NicheNet model that were expressed in at least 10% of cells in each macrophage (sender) cluster and had at least one specific receptor expressed in at least 10% of endothelial (receiver) cells.

Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell–cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration– (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells,.

The co-culture was performed by adding the macrophages to the SkOs on day 12 of culture, with a 1:5 ratio. SkOs were transferred to a low attachment 96-well plate (Nunclon Sphera, Life Technologies) in SkO maturation medium containing 20% Matrigel (Corning). Macrophages were added to the SkOs and the co-culture was centrifuged at 100g for 6 min 1 acc, 0 dec. On day 3 of co-culture, the cells were transferred to a low-attachment 24-well plate, and Matrigel was diluted with fresh SkO maturation medium. On day 35 of co-culture (day 47 of SkO differentiation), the SkOs were fixed in a 2 ml tube with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) overnight for whole-mount serial staining (2 batches of differentiation, SkOs with macrophages n = 5, SkOs without macrophages n = 5). The co-culture was then permeabilized in blocking buffer (0.3% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1% (v/v) normal goat serum based on the antibodies and 1% BSA (v/v) dissolved in 1× PBS) for 8 h at room temperature on a shaker.

For comparison of the prenatal skin macrophages with embryonic macrophages, the embryonic macrophage dataset was used as training data and prenatal skin macrophages as query; for comparison of the blood vessel organoid with prenatal skin, the prenatal skin dataset (downsampled to maximum of 500 cells per cell type) was used as training data and the blood vessel organoid data as query; for comparison of HF data, merged prenatal and organoid data were used as training data and adult dataset as query; for comparison of the prenatal skin fibroblasts and macrophages with reindeer skin fibroblasts and macrophages, the reindeer skin data subsets were used as training data and prenatal skin data subsets as query.

Differences in cell abundance associated with gestational age were tested using Milo (v.1.0.0), correcting for CD45+ and CD45– FACS isolation strategies. We first re-embedded cells into a batch-corrected latent space with a dimension of 30 using scVI model as implemented in scvi-tools considering donor and chemistry as batches. The model was trained using the 15,000 most highly variable genes that were selected based on dispersion (min_mean = 0.001, max_mean = 10) as previously described. Where FACS correction was applied, we calculated a FACS isolation correction factor for each sample s sorted with gate i as (fs = log(piS/Si)) where pi is the true proportion of cells from gate i and S represents the total number of cells from both gates. A KNN graph of cells was constructed based on distances in the latent space and cells assigned to neighbourhoods using the milopy.core.make_nhoods function (prop = 0.1).

For cell type abundance correlation analysis, we used a per-spot normalized Xn matrix. Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated for each pair of cell types (all possible pairs computed) and each sample. For visualization of correlation analysis, selected cell pairs were plotted, guided by NMF results and which cell groups or categories formed microenvironments. For example, macrophages formed microenvironments with endothelial cells (ME1 and ME5), with neural cells (ME1 and ME5) and fibroblasts (ME1, ME4 and ME5) in Fig. 1d (Supplementary Table 40).