The precise mechanisms of de novo HF formation in human embryonic development are largely inferred from mouse studies 16 . Human studies have primarily focused on morphological descriptions during development 17 or cycling HFs in adult skin 18 . Our single-cell dataset captured the onset of HF formation, which enabled direct comparison between prenatal developing HFs and adult cycling HFs. 

Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14-15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a). 

Consistent with our histological observations, we identified HF cells from 14 PCW in our scRNA-seq data, which comprised placode, matrix (SHH + ), outer root sheath (ORS) (SLC26A7 + ), companion layer (CL), inner root sheath (IRS) and cuticle and cortex cells (cuticle/cortex; part of the inner layers of the HF) (Fig. 2a-c, Extended Data Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Table 6). In addition, we observed immature and mature interfollicular epidermal (IFE) cells. Immature IFE cells, including periderm, immature basal and immature suprabasal cells, were present from 7 PCW and decreased after 11 PCW, during the transition from embryonic to fetal skin (Fig. 2b). Mature basal (DPYSL2 + ) and suprabasal IFE cells increased after 11 PCW, whereas POSTN + basal cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3b). Sebaceous and apocrine gland cells, which mature after 16 PCW 19 , were not captured at these stages. Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation 1 .

ME5, which shows co-locating macrophages and endothelial cells, is highlighted (grey). e, UMAP visualizations of the integrated prenatal skin, adult skin 10 and SkO 1 datasets, coloured by broad cell lineages. ASDC, Axl + Siglec6 + dendritic cells; DC, dendritic cells; HSC, haematopoietic stem cells; LC, Langerhans cells; LE, lymphatic endothelium; LTi, lymphoid tissue inducer cell; MEMP, megakaryocyte-erythroidmast cell progenitor; NK cell, natural killer cells; pDC, plasmacytoid dendritic cells. The images in a were created using BioRender (https://biorender.com). Inferred trajectory and pseudotime analysis of epidermal cells in the integrated prenatal skin and SkO data predicted the differentiation of POSTN + basal cells into two paths: ORS/CL trajectory, comprising DPYSL2 + basal cells, ORS and CL; and IRS trajectory, involving placode, matrix, cuticle/cortex and IRS (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 7). Along the ORS/CL trajectory, we identified new genes upregulated by DPYSL2 + basal cells, such as AGR2, and previously reported genes related to ORS differentiation (BARX2 and SOX9) 25,26 (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). AGR2 was downregulated along the IRS trajectory, whereas known matrix markers such as SHH and WNT10B 25,26 were upregulated (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). Loss of AGR2, which functions in the assembly of cysteine-rich receptors enriched in HFs, promotes cell migration 27 . Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN + basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). NMF can predict significant cellular co-locations that are not readily evident in conventional histopathology analyses 5,15 . Our analysis predicted distinct microenvironments in prenatal skin comprising epidermal, dermal, vascular and neural cells, each including specific types of immune cells (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in 'early and late neurovascular microenvironments' (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation. 

We next integrated and compared human prenatal and adult skin data 10 with the SkO model 1 . The aim was to determine the extent to which the SkO model recapitulates human skin differentiation at a molecular level and its potential utility to functionally assess the role of immune cells in skin morphogenesis (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a,b). Broadly, cell states were conserved among SkO, prenatal and adult skin, but SkO cell states matched prenatal skin more closely than adult skin across culture duration (Extended Data Fig. 2c,d and Supplementary Table 5). However, the tempo of differentiation varied across the distinct skin cell lineages. Even after 19 weeks of culture, fibroblasts, mural and Schwann cells had a low probability of correspondence to adult skin cell states (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5).

Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation 1 . Within the dermal compartment, we observed HF-specialized fibroblasts, the dermal condensate (Dc) and dermal papilla (Dp), from 12 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c). 

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs 20 (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (T reg ) cells 21 , and in control of autoimmunity (CD24) 22 . This result highlighted the potential role of T reg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). T reg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin 23,24 . , adult healthy skin 10 and hair-bearing SkO 1 were integrated for comparison. Spatial experiments were carried out using RNAscope, immunofluorescence and Visium analyses. Findings of the study were functionally validated using a SkO co-culture. b, Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization of the prenatal skin dataset with broad annotation of cell states, as denoted by colour and number in the legend. c, Milo beeswarm plot showing the differential abundance of neighbourhoods in prenatal skin across gestation time, annotated by broad cell labels. Red and blue neighbourhoods are significantly enriched in earlier or later gestation, respectively. Colour intensity denotes degree of significance. d, Dotplot showing spatial microenvironments (MEs). Cell type to microenvironment coefficients are normalized by cell type sums, and cell type to microenvironment assignment is shown by colour. ME5, which shows co-locating macrophages and endothelial cells, is highlighted (grey).

These distinctions between human and mouse skin may be attributed to organismal differences in gestation lengths and tempo of differentiation. Cellular differentiation occurs at a quicker pace in mice 44 , whereas the longer gestation period in humans permits more advanced maturation to take place in utero.

By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the SkO model recapitulated the different components of prenatal skin HF, interfollicular epidermis, neural cells and dermal fibroblasts, but immune cells were not represented and endothelial cells were markedly reduced.

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA + FOXD1 + SOX2 low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1 + SOX2 + ), which abuts the epithelial hair placode 26,28 . Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin 28,29 . Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP + , SOX2 + ) 26,28 (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h). 

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB + fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5 + early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2 + fibroblasts and PEAR1 + fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

To characterize the role of distinct lineages and cell states during human prenatal skin development, we obtained single-cell suspensions of skin from 7 to 17 PCW, spanning the first and second trimesters (Fig. 1a). We performed fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to isolate live, single immune (CD45 + ) and non-immune (CD45 -) populations and to enhance keratinocyte and endothelial cell capture before scRNA-seq profiling (Extended Data Fig. 1a and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Single-cell αβ T cell receptor (TCR) sequencing data were generated to accurately resolve T cell subsets. Spatial validation was carried out using multiplex RNA in situ hybridization (RNAscope), newly generated spatial transcriptomics (Visium) data from embryonic facial and abdominal skin, and published Visium data from embryonic limb from which only skin areas were analysed 12 (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 2). In addition, we integrated new and published single-cell datasets of adult skin 10 and of a hair-bearing SkO model derived from human embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells 1 for comparative analysis (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 2). We also compared in vivo prenatal and organoid HFs with scRNA-seq data of adult HFs 11 . Our data can be interactively explored through our WebAtlas-based 13 portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-skin). The analysis software for this study is archived at Zenodo (https://doi. org/10.5281/zenodo.8164271) 14 . 

Our prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset comprised 534,581 cells, of which 433,961 cells passed quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1b). Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3).

Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3). Differential abundance analysis testing revealed how different cell populations varied across gestation. Among ectoderm-derived cells, neural cells and the periderm, which constitutes the first skin permeability barrier 2 , were enriched in early gestation, whereas suprabasal epidermal and HF cells were mainly observed in later gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Mesoderm-derived cells, including skin fibroblasts and endothelial cells, and immune cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Innate immune cells, such as macrophages and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), were present from early gestation, whereas B cells and T cells emerged later, accompanying thymus, bone marrow and spleen formation from around 10 PCW (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Some subsets of macrophages, ILCs and fibroblasts exhibited distinct gene expression profiles between early and late gestation, which suggested that functional maturation or dual waves of production occur during development (Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 1d). 

To locate cells identified from scRNA-seq data in situ, we performed Cell2location 15 analysis of spatial transcriptomics data of facial and abdominal skin (10 PCW) and embryonic lower limb skin (6-8 PCW) 12 (Supplementary Table 2). We assessed cell type co-location using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to computationally predict microenvironments in conjunction with correlation analyses. Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f).

TFs that were mismatched across pseudotime or drove misalignment in early and late pseudotime (for example, HOXA7 and BARX1) were largely attributable to the different origins of dermal cells between prenatal skin (trunk and limb) and SkO (neural crest differentiation) 40 (Extended Data Fig. 5d,e and Supplementary Table 9). 

We also assessed the expression profiles of genes previously reported in mouse HF formation. Similar signalling pathways were upregulated, including WNT and EDA for hair placode specification, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and noggin to inhibit hair formation in IFE cells, and PDGFA and TGFβ signalling for HF down growth 26 (Extended Data Fig. 5f). Additionally, similar to fibroblast differentiation in mouse skin, pre-Dcs, the Dc and Dp and dermal fibroblasts in human prenatal skin also originated from a common fibroblast progenitor (HOXC5 + early fibroblast) (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 4d). However, cross-species data integration of human and mouse HF 41 showed that human pre-Dc cells and the Dc aligned not only to their counterparts in mouse skin but also to fibroblasts in earlier stages of differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 5g-i and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11). This result suggests that for corresponding cell types, HF fibroblasts are in a more differentiated state in mouse compared to human prenatal skin. Additionally, dermal fibroblast differentiation into histologically defined subsets (papillary and reticular) has been reported to occur early in mice (about embryonic day 12.5) 42 . Our human prenatal skin fibroblasts did not significantly express papillary fibroblast markers (for example, COL13A1) 43 (Extended Data Fig. 5j), which suggested that the distinction between papillary and reticular fibroblasts emerges after 17 PCW. These distinctions between human and mouse skin may be attributed to organismal differences in gestation lengths and tempo of differentiation.

Human developmental tissue samples used for this study were obtained from the MRC-Wellcome Trust-funded Human Developmental Biology Resource (http://www.hdbr.org) with approval from the Newcastle and North Tyneside NHS Health Authority Joint Ethics Committee (08/H0906/21+5) and East of England-Cambridge Central Research Ethics Committee (NHS REC 96/085). Prenatal skin for immunofluorescence imaging of proteins causing congenital skin disorders were obtained with approval from the Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital Trust Ethics Committee. For samples used for 3D rendering in the Koehler Laboratory, fetal tissue specimens were obtained from the Birth Defects Research Laboratory at the University of Washington (UW) with approval from the UW institutional review board Committee, and the study was performed in accordance with ethical and legal guidelines of the Boston Children's Hospital institutional review board. All samples were collected following either elective termination of pregnancy or miscarriages, with informed written consent, following all relevant rules and regulations. 

Tissues were processed into single-cell suspensions immediately after receipt for single-cell transcriptomic profiling. Tissue was first transferred to a sterile 10 mm 2 tissue culture dish and cut in <1 mm 3 segments using a scalpel. It was then digested with type IV collagenase (final concentration of 1.6 mg ml -1 ; Worthington) in RPMI (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Gibco) at 37 °C for 30 min with intermittent agitation. Digested tissue was then passed through a 100 µm cell strainer. For 2 samples (F220, F221), 500 µl of 0.25% trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) was further added to any remaining unfiltered tissue and incubated at room temperature for 5 min. Cells were collected by centrifugation (500g for 5 min at 4 °C). Cells were treated with 1× RBC lysis buffer (eBioscience) for 5 min at room temperature and washed once with flow buffer (PBS containing 5% (v/v) FBS and 2 mM EDTA) before cell counting and antibody staining.

3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7). Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell-cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration [30][31][32] (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells 33,34 . 

We explored the mesenchymal-epithelial interactions that instruct early HF formation. Receptor-ligand analysis predicted interactions between CXCL12 expressed by pre-Dc cells (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h) with ACKR3 on epidermal basal cells (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Table 8). RNAscope analysis confirmed that these two genes co-located (Fig. 2h). This result suggests that CXCL12 probably interacts with ACKR3 to mediate the migration of pre-Dc cells 31,35 . Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand-receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12-CXCR4 and CXCL12-DPP4) 35,36  The Dc, for which formation is accompanied by invagination of the placode, expressed FAM3C and EFNB1, which were, respectively, predicted to interact with LAMP1 or CXADR and EPHB6 on the placode, and have been reported to promote cell migration and invasion 37,38 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8).

Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand-receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12-CXCR4 and CXCL12-DPP4) 35,36  The Dc, for which formation is accompanied by invagination of the placode, expressed FAM3C and EFNB1, which were, respectively, predicted to interact with LAMP1 or CXADR and EPHB6 on the placode, and have been reported to promote cell migration and invasion 37,38 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8). Finally, RSPO3 from the Dp was predicted to interact with LGR4 and LGR6 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8) in overlying matrix cells to contribute to the proliferation of HF epithelial cells 33 . Notably, the highlighted interactions were conserved between the mesenchymal and epithelial cells of the SkO model for corresponding stages during HF formation (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 8). These results provide orthogonal validation of our findings and reinforce the utility of the SkO as an accurate model of prenatal skin development. 

We further evaluated the differentiation trajectory alignment between prenatal skin and the SkO model using the Genes2Genes analysis framework 39 to compare the expression of transcription factors (TFs) along the hair fibroblast trajectory. Overall, we observed a high number of matching TFs across pseudotime, which indicated that there are similar activated gene regulatory programs between prenatal skin and SkO during HF fibroblast differentiation (Fig. 2i and Supplementary Table 9). TFs that were mismatched across pseudotime or drove misalignment in early and late pseudotime (for example, HOXA7 and BARX1) were largely attributable to the different origins of dermal cells between prenatal skin (trunk and limb) and SkO (neural crest differentiation) 40 (Extended Data Fig. 5d,e and Supplementary Table 9).

A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2 + basal, POSTN + basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g). The same analysis was performed to obtain the top 10 interactions in SkO HFs (Extended Data Fig. 5c), defining early/late to match corresponding cell states as in prenatal skin. The top 10 interactions identified in prenatal skin HFs were also plotted within the SkO data to highlight similarities and differences between the two (Fig. 2g). 

Comparison with adult fibroblasts. Integrated scRNA-seq data from prenatal skin and adult healthy skin (with original annotations) 10 was subsetted to the cell group of interest (fibroblasts). DEGs between the adult and prenatal skin fibroblasts were derived using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test implementation in scanpy and adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (scanpy.tl.rank_genes_ groups, method = "wilcoxon", corr_method = "benjamini-hochberg"). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the top 1,000 genes in each group ranked by scores (Supplementary Table 13) and the implementation of the Enrichr workflow 102 in the Python package GSEApy (https://gseapy.readthedocs.io/; v.0.10.7) with Gene Ontology Biological Process (2021) as the query database (Supplementary Tables 14, 15). A selected list of genes was plotted to highlight differences between prenatal and adult skin fibroblasts. 

Gene set enrichment analysis.

Human prenatal skin is populated by innate immune cells, including macrophages, but whether they act solely in immunity or have additional functions in morphogenesis is unclear. Here we assembled a comprehensive multi-omics reference atlas of prenatal human skin (7–17 post-conception weeks), combining single-cell and spatial transcriptomics data, to characterize the microanatomical tissue niches of the skin. This atlas revealed that crosstalk between non-immune and immune cells underpins the formation of hair follicles, is implicated in scarless wound healing and is crucial for skin angiogenesis. We systematically compared a hair-bearing skin organoid (SkO) model derived from human embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells to prenatal and adult skin1. The SkO model closely recapitulated in vivo skin epidermal and dermal cell types during hair follicle development and expression of genes implicated in the pathogenesis of genetic hair and skin disorders. However, the SkO model lacked immune cells and had markedly reduced endothelial cell heterogeneity and quantity. Our in vivo prenatal skin cell atlas indicated that macrophages and macrophage-derived growth factors have a role in driving endothelial development. Indeed, vascular network remodelling was enhanced following transfer of autologous macrophages derived from induced pluripotent stem cells into SkO cultures. Innate immune cells are therefore key players in skin morphogenesis beyond their conventional role in immunity, a function they achieve through crosstalk with non-immune cells. A comprehensive multi-omics reference atlas of prenatal human skin shows that innate immune cells crosstalk with non-immune cells to perform pivotal roles in skin morphogenesis, including the formation of hair follicles.

Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29). Inferred trajectory analysis showed that early endothelial cells in prenatal skin differentiated into either an arteriolar pathway (capillaries, capillary arterioles and arterioles) or venular pathway (postcapillary venules and venules), with expression of characteristic genes (for example, GJA5 for arteriolar and PLVAP for venular) (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a-c). Unlike SkO capillary arteriole cells, prenatal skin capillary arteriole cells could further differentiate into arterioles (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a). Additional comparison with a human ES cell-derived and iPS cell-derived blood vessel organoid 71 , which also lacked immune cells, further demonstrated the limited vasculature differentiation of this mesoderm-geared blood vessel organoid model (Extended Data Fig. 10d). This result confirms that immune cells are required to fully recapitulate in vivo endothelial cell development. 

We next investigated additional mechanisms for failed expansion and differentiation of SkO endothelial cells. Expression of genes and gene modules related to blood flow and hypoxia were lower in SkO than in prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 10e,f and Supplementary Table 29). However, sprouting angiogenesis potential, assessed by scoring the 'tip' cell state, was increased in both SkO capillary arteriole cells and prenatal skin arteriole, capillary arteriole and capillary cells (Extended Data Fig. 10g,h). This suggests that despite strong expression of the sprouting angiogenesis gene signature, SkO capillary arteriole cells are unable to guide stalk cells for new blood vessel formation.

Having mapped the differentiation of prenatal skin HFs, we leveraged this information to assess the extent to which genetic hair diseases have their roots in utero. Genes harbouring mutations known to cause reduced hair growth (hypotrichosis) or abnormally shaped hair (for example, pili torti) (Supplementary Table 12) were expressed along the ORS/CL trajectory, IRS trajectory and hair fibroblast trajectory pseudotimes (Extended Data Figs. 4f and 6a,b) and in prenatal HF cell Article states (Extended Data Fig. 6c). This finding suggested that these disorders result from dysfunctional HF development. 

Genes causing epidermolysis bullosa (EB), an inherited blistering skin disorder characterized by skin fragility secondary to structural defects in the epidermis and adjacent dermoepidermal junction 45 , were highly expressed in prenatal epidermal cells and at the dermoepidermal junction (Extended Data Fig. 6d,e). Gene therapy studies for dystrophic EB have identified fibroblasts expressing COL7A1 as a promising therapeutic strategy 46 . We observed COL7A1 expression across several fibroblast subsets in prenatal skin and SkOs (Extended Data Fig. 6d), which lends support to the gene therapy approaches. The expression of genes implicated in congenital ichthyoses, a group of disorders resulting from abnormal epidermal differentiation 47 , were primarily confined to keratinocytes (Extended Data Fig. 6f). 

Notably, we observed similar gene expression patterns across prenatal skin and SkO for the above described genetic hair and skin disorders (Extended Data Fig. 6c,d,f), which supported the value of the SkO as a model to study congenital diseases. Although we found that expression of genes implicated in these disorders are confined to structural cells, disease manifestations are often associated with immune infiltration, which implicates skin-immune crosstalk during pathogenesis 48,49 .

A combination of fibroblast and macrophage-associated molecular features potentially contribute to the ability of prenatal skin to heal without scarring, including the presence of fibroblast progenitors, a downregulated immune milieu and reduced collagen expression. However, we found progressive 'ageing' and acquisition of the adult 'pro-inflammatory' phenotype as early as 9 PCW, which could be targeted in fibroblasts to guide postnatal scarless healing. Future studies that align human fibroblast subsets across the lifespan are required to investigate the dynamics of scarless healing and the roles of mechanical forces, microbiota and environmental exposure on fibroblast functions. 

Our prenatal human skin atlas represents a valuable resource to explore genes that cause congenital hair and skin disorders and is freely accessible from our web portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/ fetal-skin). We found that implicated genes are indeed expressed during prenatal skin development and HF differentiation, thereby supporting an in utero origin for these disorders. Our systematic prenatal skin-SkO comparison provides a blueprint to guide more faithful in vitro SkO generation, which can facilitate future studies of interactions with the microbiota, the pathogenesis of congenital skin disorders, and hair and skin engineering for therapeutic applications, including hair regeneration and skin transplant.

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. (e) Gene expression plots for representative genes in prenatal skin (green) and SkO (blue) across pseudotime. Left column: the interpolated log1p transformed expression (y-axis) against pseudotime (x-axis). and percent of expressing cells (dot size) of marker genes 5 used to annotate macrophage subsets in prenatal skin. (g) Circos plot visualisation of representative significant (adjusted p-value <0.05, significance calculated in CellphoneDB using empirical shuffling and FDR-adjusted) predicted interactions between macrophages (LYVE1 + and TML macrophage) and co-localising WNT2 + fibroblasts in prenatal skin. Arrows represent directionality of interactions (ligand to receptor); connection width is proportional to the CellphoneDB mean value for each ligand-receptor pair. ASDC, Axl + Siglec6 + dendritic cells; DC, dendritic cells; LC, Langerhans cells. between embryonic immune cells (x-axis) and prenatal skin (y-axis) myeloid cell states for a logistic regression model trained on embryonic data 57 and projected onto prenatal skin myeloid cell subset. TML macrophage had the highest proportion prediction to Mac4 (embryonic brain microglia). (c) Gene set enrichment analysis results of over-expressed genes (wilcoxon, two-sided, Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted) in macrophage subsets (TML, Iron-recycling, LYVE1 + and MHCII + , macrophages). Each plot shows the top 10 enriched gene sets (using Gene Ontology Biological Process 2023 (left) and MSigDB Hallmark 2020 (right) databases). The x-axis shows the negative log