Consistent with our histological observations, we identified HF cells from 14 PCW in our scRNA-seq data, which comprised placode, matrix (SHH+), outer root sheath (ORS) (SLC26A7+), companion layer (CL), inner root sheath (IRS) and cuticle and cortex cells (cuticle/cortex; part of the inner layers of the HF) (Fig. 2a–c, Extended Data Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Table 6). In addition, we observed immature and mature interfollicular epidermal (IFE) cells. Immature IFE cells, including periderm, immature basal and immature suprabasal cells, were present from 7 PCW and decreased after 11 PCW, during the transition from embryonic to fetal skin (Fig. 2b). Mature basal (DPYSL2+) and suprabasal IFE cells increased after 11 PCW, whereas POSTN+ basal cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3b). Sebaceous and apocrine gland cells, which mature after 16 PCW, were not captured at these stages.

Human skin organogenesis begins after gastrulation from two primary germ layers. The epidermis, the most superficial layer of the skin, melanocytes and neural cells arise from the ectoderm. The dermis, which is separated from the epidermis by the basement membrane and contains endothelial and mural cells, derives from the mesoderm (apart from facial and cranial skin, where it arises from ectoderm-derived neural crest cells). The skin appendages, which include hair follicles (HFs) and sebaceous glands, form in a cephalocaudal direction. Prenatal HFs start forming between 11 and 14 post-conception weeks (PCW), initiated by interactions between epidermal placodes (focal sites of epidermal layer thickening) and dermal condensates (aggregates of dermal fibroblasts), whereas sebaceous glands develop from around 16 PCW.

By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the SkO model recapitulated the different components of prenatal skin HF, interfollicular epidermis, neural cells and dermal fibroblasts, but immune cells were not represented and endothelial cells were markedly reduced.

Innate immune cells, such as macrophages and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), were present from early gestation, whereas B cells and T cells emerged later, accompanying thymus, bone marrow and spleen formation from around 10 PCW (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Some subsets of macrophages, ILCs and fibroblasts exhibited distinct gene expression profiles between early and late gestation, which suggested that functional maturation or dual waves of production occur during development (Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 1d).

Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in ‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’ (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation.

Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14–15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a).

Our prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset comprised 534,581 cells, of which 433,961 cells passed quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1b). Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3). Differential abundance analysis testing revealed how different cell populations varied across gestation. Among ectoderm-derived cells, neural cells and the periderm, which constitutes the first skin permeability barrier, were enriched in early gestation, whereas suprabasal epidermal and HF cells were mainly observed in later gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Mesoderm-derived cells, including skin fibroblasts and endothelial cells, and immune cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4).

Cells were then incubated overnight at 4 °C on a shaker (65 r.p.m.) with the first primary antibody, anti-CD45 (1:100, clone YAML501.4, ThermoFisher) for macrophages, for 48 h. The morning after, cells were washed and then incubated with the first secondary antibody overnight (goat anti-rat IgG, Alexa Fluor Plus 647, ThermoFisher). The morning after, SkOs were washed and incubated with the second primary antibody, anti-CD31 (1:100, clone JC70A, Dako) for endothelial cells for 48 h. The SkOs were then washed and incubated with the second secondary antibody (goat anti-mouse IgG1, Alexa Fluor 568, ThermoFisher) and DAPI overnight on a shaker. Cells were washed and placed in 50% glycerol for 30 min on a shaker at room temperature. Cells were then transferred to 70% glycerol overnight on a shaker at room temperature. The following morning, the co-culture was mounted and imaged using a custom 4-camera spinning disk confocal microscope.

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29). Inferred trajectory analysis showed that early endothelial cells in prenatal skin differentiated into either an arteriolar pathway (capillaries, capillary arterioles and arterioles) or venular pathway (postcapillary venules and venules), with expression of characteristic genes (for example, GJA5 for arteriolar and PLVAP for venular) (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a–c). Unlike SkO capillary arteriole cells, prenatal skin capillary arteriole cells could further differentiate into arterioles (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a).

Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN+ basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

There is, however, a paucity of information about the precise cellular composition of human prenatal skin over these developmental periods and whether cells interact in functional microanatomical niches that support skin morphogenesis.

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (Treg) cells, and in control of autoimmunity (CD24). This result highlighted the potential role of Treg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). Treg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin,. RNAscope (FOXP3+) and immunofluorescence staining (FOXP3+) showed that Treg cells were primarily located within and around HFs compared to interfollicular skin as early as 15 PCW (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3g,h).