Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation. Within the dermal compartment, we observed HF-specialized fibroblasts, the dermal condensate (Dc) and dermal papilla (Dp), from 12 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c).

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA+FOXD1+SOX2low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1+SOX2+), which abuts the epithelial hair placode,. Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin,. Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP+, SOX2+), (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h).

This result suggests that for corresponding cell types, HF fibroblasts are in a more differentiated state in mouse compared to human prenatal skin. Additionally, dermal fibroblast differentiation into histologically defined subsets (papillary and reticular) has been reported to occur early in mice (about embryonic day 12.5). Our human prenatal skin fibroblasts did not significantly express papillary fibroblast markers (for example, COL13A1) (Extended Data Fig. 5j), which suggested that the distinction between papillary and reticular fibroblasts emerges after 17 PCW. These distinctions between human and mouse skin may be attributed to organismal differences in gestation lengths and tempo of differentiation. Cellular differentiation occurs at a quicker pace in mice, whereas the longer gestation period in humans permits more advanced maturation to take place in utero.

Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN+ basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

Prenatal skin cells and organoid cells were integrated using Harmony (v.0.0.5), treating datasets as batches (prenatal skin or organoid) and within dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal skin, strain for SkO, and 10x kit version for both datasets). Leiden clusters were annotated using known markers.

Inferred trajectory and pseudotime analysis of epidermal cells in the integrated prenatal skin and SkO data predicted the differentiation of POSTN+ basal cells into two paths: ORS/CL trajectory, comprising DPYSL2+ basal cells, ORS and CL; and IRS trajectory, involving placode, matrix, cuticle/cortex and IRS (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 7). Along the ORS/CL trajectory, we identified new genes upregulated by DPYSL2+ basal cells, such as AGR2, and previously reported genes related to ORS differentiation (BARX2 and SOX9), (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). AGR2 was downregulated along the IRS trajectory, whereas known matrix markers such as SHH and WNT10B, were upregulated (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). Loss of AGR2, which functions in the assembly of cysteine-rich receptors enriched in HFs, promotes cell migration.

Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14–15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a).

Human skin organogenesis begins after gastrulation from two primary germ layers. The epidermis, the most superficial layer of the skin, melanocytes and neural cells arise from the ectoderm. The dermis, which is separated from the epidermis by the basement membrane and contains endothelial and mural cells, derives from the mesoderm (apart from facial and cranial skin, where it arises from ectoderm-derived neural crest cells). The skin appendages, which include hair follicles (HFs) and sebaceous glands, form in a cephalocaudal direction. Prenatal HFs start forming between 11 and 14 post-conception weeks (PCW), initiated by interactions between epidermal placodes (focal sites of epidermal layer thickening) and dermal condensates (aggregates of dermal fibroblasts), whereas sebaceous glands develop from around 16 PCW.

To explore inferred interactions between macrophage subsets and endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 9a), we aggregated the interactions predicted for each macrophage subset and the different subtypes of endothelial cells (early endothelial cells, arterioles, capillary arterioles, capillaries, postcapillary venules and venules) by averaging the means and using the minimum of the adjusted P values as previously described. A curated list of aggregated interactions were plotted for visualization using ggplot2 (v.3.3.6). A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2+ basal, POSTN+ basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g).

Clusters of doublets were manually flagged and removed, taking into account markers genes and previously calculated scrublet scores. To have a final global visualization of the atlas, a doublet-free UMAP was generated (Fig. 1b).

We further evaluated the differentiation trajectory alignment between prenatal skin and the SkO model using the Genes2Genes analysis framework to compare the expression of transcription factors (TFs) along the hair fibroblast trajectory. Overall, we observed a high number of matching TFs across pseudotime, which indicated that there are similar activated gene regulatory programs between prenatal skin and SkO during HF fibroblast differentiation (Fig. 2i and Supplementary Table 9). TFs that were mismatched across pseudotime or drove misalignment in early and late pseudotime (for example, HOXA7 and BARX1) were largely attributable to the different origins of dermal cells between prenatal skin (trunk and limb) and SkO (neural crest differentiation) (Extended Data Fig. 5d,e and Supplementary Table 9).

By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the SkO model recapitulated the different components of prenatal skin HF, interfollicular epidermis, neural cells and dermal fibroblasts, but immune cells were not represented and endothelial cells were markedly reduced.

Prenatal human skin is able to heal without scarring but loses this capacity after 24 PCW. Scars result from aggregation of collagen produced by dermal fibroblasts and failure of the overlying epidermis to completely regenerate. To identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms that may endow early prenatal skin with scarless healing properties, we investigated the temporal changes in composition and transcriptional profile of the dermal fibroblast subsets (Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7a). We first compared prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts with healthy adult skin fibroblasts. All adult fibroblast subsets expressed high levels of inflammatory cytokines and receptors (for example, IL6 and IL1RA) and genes involved in antigen presentation (for example, HLA-A), innate immune and inflammatory responses (for example, CD55 and PTGES) and cellular senescence (CDKN1A) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13–15).

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB+ fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5+ early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2+ fibroblasts and PEAR1+ fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

There is, however, a paucity of information about the precise cellular composition of human prenatal skin over these developmental periods and whether cells interact in functional microanatomical niches that support skin morphogenesis.

Our prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset comprised 534,581 cells, of which 433,961 cells passed quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1b). Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3). Differential abundance analysis testing revealed how different cell populations varied across gestation. Among ectoderm-derived cells, neural cells and the periderm, which constitutes the first skin permeability barrier, were enriched in early gestation, whereas suprabasal epidermal and HF cells were mainly observed in later gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Mesoderm-derived cells, including skin fibroblasts and endothelial cells, and immune cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4).

Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell–cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration– (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells,.

We also assessed the expression profiles of genes previously reported in mouse HF formation. Similar signalling pathways were upregulated, including WNT and EDA for hair placode specification, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and noggin to inhibit hair formation in IFE cells, and PDGFA and TGFβ signalling for HF down growth (Extended Data Fig. 5f). Additionally, similar to fibroblast differentiation in mouse skin, pre-Dcs, the Dc and Dp and dermal fibroblasts in human prenatal skin also originated from a common fibroblast progenitor (HOXC5+ early fibroblast) (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 4d). However, cross-species data integration of human and mouse HF showed that human pre-Dc cells and the Dc aligned not only to their counterparts in mouse skin but also to fibroblasts in earlier stages of differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 5g–i and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11).

The CellRank package (v.1.5.2) was used to define cell transition matrices, lineage drivers and rank fate probabilities of terminal state transitions across annotated lineages in a combined embedding of prenatal skin and SkO for keratinocytes and fibroblasts and in the prenatal skin for endothelial cells. Using pp.moments (n_pcs=10, n_neighbours=30) from the scVelo package (v.0.3.0), first order kinetics matrices were imputed. Using the palantir kernel and the velocity kernel in CellRank, a mixed probability transition matrix was computed with the palantir kernel weighing 70% and the velocity kernel 30%. Schur matrix Eigen decomposition (n_components=25, method=‘brandts’) identified macrostates, terminal stages and initial stages. Lineage drivers were then computed for each state using compute_lineage_drivers from CellRank and pseudotime and latent time computed in scVelo (Supplementary Table 7).

Consistent with our histological observations, we identified HF cells from 14 PCW in our scRNA-seq data, which comprised placode, matrix (SHH+), outer root sheath (ORS) (SLC26A7+), companion layer (CL), inner root sheath (IRS) and cuticle and cortex cells (cuticle/cortex; part of the inner layers of the HF) (Fig. 2a–c, Extended Data Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Table 6). In addition, we observed immature and mature interfollicular epidermal (IFE) cells. Immature IFE cells, including periderm, immature basal and immature suprabasal cells, were present from 7 PCW and decreased after 11 PCW, during the transition from embryonic to fetal skin (Fig. 2b). Mature basal (DPYSL2+) and suprabasal IFE cells increased after 11 PCW, whereas POSTN+ basal cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3b). Sebaceous and apocrine gland cells, which mature after 16 PCW, were not captured at these stages.

We used Dynamic Programming-based alignment to evaluate agreement between the single-cell trajectories of prenatal skin and SkO fibroblasts, which describe the in vivo and in vitro differentiation lineages from HOXC5+ early fibroblasts to the Dp. Genes2Genes (G2G) is a Bayesian Information-theoretic Dynamic Programming framework that consistently captures matches and mismatches between two trajectories at both the gene level and the cell level. G2G outputs an optimal trajectory alignment that describes a nonlinear mapping of in vivo and in vitro pseudotime points in sequential order. This is based on the cost of matching or mismatching the gene expression distributions of each pair of organoid–reference time points, computed as a statistic of entropy difference between the two hypotheses under the minimum message length criterion. This statistic is a Shannon information distance, calculated in the unit of information, nits.

Highly variable gene selection, dimensionality reduction and KNN graph construction were done using the same method and parameters as prenatal skin. BBKNN (v.1.3.390) was used for batch-correction treating combinations of strains and 10x kit versions as batches. Broad lineages were annotated based on known markers. Each broad lineage was then re-processed in the same way as prenatal skin to annotate cell types at higher resolution.

Genes causing epidermolysis bullosa (EB), an inherited blistering skin disorder characterized by skin fragility secondary to structural defects in the epidermis and adjacent dermoepidermal junction, were highly expressed in prenatal epidermal cells and at the dermoepidermal junction (Extended Data Fig. 6d,e). Gene therapy studies for dystrophic EB have identified fibroblasts expressing COL7A1 as a promising therapeutic strategy. We observed COL7A1 expression across several fibroblast subsets in prenatal skin and SkOs (Extended Data Fig. 6d), which lends support to the gene therapy approaches. The expression of genes implicated in congenital ichthyoses, a group of disorders resulting from abnormal epidermal differentiation, were primarily confined to keratinocytes (Extended Data Fig. 6f).

Having mapped the differentiation of prenatal skin HFs, we leveraged this information to assess the extent to which genetic hair diseases have their roots in utero. Genes harbouring mutations known to cause reduced hair growth (hypotrichosis) or abnormally shaped hair (for example, pili torti) (Supplementary Table 12) were expressed along the ORS/CL trajectory, IRS trajectory and hair fibroblast trajectory pseudotimes (Extended Data Figs. 4f and 6a,b) and in prenatal HF cell states (Extended Data Fig. 6c). This finding suggested that these disorders result from dysfunctional HF development.

Images of haematoxylin and eosin-stained skin sections (Fig. 2a) were taken from 13 independent samples from the following gestational ages: 6 PCW (n = 1 and 3 sections), 8 PCW (n = 3), 11 PCW (n = 2), 14 PCW (n = 1 and 2 sections), 15 PCW (n = 4) and 17 PCW (n = 2).

The sctk package also carries out comparisons between the group of interest (one with highest expression) and the next group (second highly expressed), where the maximum proportion of cells expressing the gene in question in the second most highly expressed group was 0.2. For epidermal annotations, we created a combined embedding of prenatal skin and SkO data, integrated using the Harmony pipeline, as well as integration with adult HF to check annotations, as described below. Harmony-corrected principal components were used to compute the batch-corrected nearest neighbourhood graph, and the Leiden algorithm was used to cluster the integrated data. The sctk package was then used to derive DEGs for each Leiden cluster. Annotation was carried out on the clusters based on marker genes and refined annotations in the SkO data.

Although we note similarities between human and mouse in the signalling pathways co-ordinating HF formation, our study reveals key cross-species distinctions in the differentiation tempo of HF mesenchymal cells. Future studies are required to fully delineate the features that distinguish human skin development.

Notably, we observed similar gene expression patterns across prenatal skin and SkO for the above described genetic hair and skin disorders (Extended Data Fig. 6c,d,f), which supported the value of the SkO as a model to study congenital diseases. Although we found that expression of genes implicated in these disorders are confined to structural cells, disease manifestations are often associated with immune infiltration, which implicates skin–immune crosstalk during pathogenesis,.

We next integrated and compared human prenatal and adult skin data with the SkO model. The aim was to determine the extent to which the SkO model recapitulates human skin differentiation at a molecular level and its potential utility to functionally assess the role of immune cells in skin morphogenesis (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a,b). Broadly, cell states were conserved among SkO, prenatal and adult skin, but SkO cell states matched prenatal skin more closely than adult skin across culture duration (Extended Data Fig. 2c,d and Supplementary Table 5). However, the tempo of differentiation varied across the distinct skin cell lineages. Even after 19 weeks of culture, fibroblasts, mural and Schwann cells had a low probability of correspondence to adult skin cell states (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5).

In addition, we integrated new and published single-cell datasets of adult skin and of a hair-bearing SkO model derived from human embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells for comparative analysis (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 2). We also compared in vivo prenatal and organoid HFs with scRNA-seq data of adult HFs. Our data can be interactively explored through our WebAtlas-based portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-skin). The analysis software for this study is archived at Zenodo (10.5281/zenodo.8164271).

To characterize the role of distinct lineages and cell states during human prenatal skin development, we obtained single-cell suspensions of skin from 7 to 17 PCW, spanning the first and second trimesters (Fig. 1a). We performed fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to isolate live, single immune (CD45+) and non-immune (CD45–) populations and to enhance keratinocyte and endothelial cell capture before scRNA-seq profiling (Extended Data Fig. 1a and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Single-cell αβ T cell receptor (TCR) sequencing data were generated to accurately resolve T cell subsets. Spatial validation was carried out using multiplex RNA in situ hybridization (RNAscope), newly generated spatial transcriptomics (Visium) data from embryonic facial and abdominal skin, and published Visium data from embryonic limb from which only skin areas were analysed (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 2).

To locate cells identified from scRNA-seq data in situ, we performed Cell2location analysis of spatial transcriptomics data of facial and abdominal skin (10 PCW) and embryonic lower limb skin (6–8 PCW) (Supplementary Table 2). We assessed cell type co-location using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to computationally predict microenvironments in conjunction with correlation analyses. Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). NMF can predict significant cellular co-locations that are not readily evident in conventional histopathology analyses,. Our analysis predicted distinct microenvironments in prenatal skin comprising epidermal, dermal, vascular and neural cells, each including specific types of immune cells (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f).

The Dc, for which formation is accompanied by invagination of the placode, expressed FAM3C and EFNB1, which were, respectively, predicted to interact with LAMP1 or CXADR and EPHB6 on the placode, and have been reported to promote cell migration and invasion, (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8). Finally, RSPO3 from the Dp was predicted to interact with LGR4 and LGR6 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8) in overlying matrix cells to contribute to the proliferation of HF epithelial cells. Notably, the highlighted interactions were conserved between the mesenchymal and epithelial cells of the SkO model for corresponding stages during HF formation (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 8). These results provide orthogonal validation of our findings and reinforce the utility of the SkO as an accurate model of prenatal skin development.

By contrast, prenatal skin fibroblasts had upregulated genes involved in immune suppression (CD200), regulation of inflammation (for example, RAMP2) and tissue regeneration (MDK) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13–15).

Our current study provides a comprehensive multi-omics cell atlas of 7–17 PCW human prenatal skin. We profiled human prenatal skin using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), spatial transcriptomics and multiplex RNA in situ hybridization to decode the dynamic cellular and molecular changes across gestation that regulate skin and HF morphogenesis. We leveraged adult healthy skin and HF datasets, to compare and assess developmental-specific features that contribute to scarless skin healing and cues that guide de novo HF formation. We used a hair-bearing SkO model to validate the role of macrophages in prenatal skin vascular network formation.

The role of macrophages in promoting wound healing has been described in postnatal mouse skin and in adult human skin. In prenatal skin, macrophage subsets (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f) were predicted to co-locate with fibroblasts, neural cells and vascular cells in distinct tissue microenvironments in early gestation (Fig. 1d). Specifically, LYVE1+ macrophages co-located with WNT2+ fibroblasts (Fig. 3c–e) and were predicted to interact through platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and corresponding receptors (PDGFRα and PDGFRβ) expressed on fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8). Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart. Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1–IGF1R and GRN–EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1+ macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts.

The precise mechanisms of de novo HF formation in human embryonic development are largely inferred from mouse studies. Human studies have primarily focused on morphological descriptions during development or cycling HFs in adult skin. Our single-cell dataset captured the onset of HF formation, which enabled direct comparison between prenatal developing HFs and adult cycling HFs.

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (Treg) cells, and in control of autoimmunity (CD24). This result highlighted the potential role of Treg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). Treg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin,. RNAscope (FOXP3+) and immunofluorescence staining (FOXP3+) showed that Treg cells were primarily located within and around HFs compared to interfollicular skin as early as 15 PCW (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3g,h).

Our prenatal human skin atlas represents a valuable resource to explore genes that cause congenital hair and skin disorders and is freely accessible from our web portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-skin). We found that implicated genes are indeed expressed during prenatal skin development and HF differentiation, thereby supporting an in utero origin for these disorders. Our systematic prenatal skin–SkO comparison provides a blueprint to guide more faithful in vitro SkO generation, which can facilitate future studies of interactions with the microbiota, the pathogenesis of congenital skin disorders, and hair and skin engineering for therapeutic applications, including hair regeneration and skin transplant.

We further compared prenatal skin fibroblasts and macrophages to their counterparts in reindeer skin from antlers, which heal without scarring, and in back skin, which scars. Early-gestation human skin fibroblasts had a higher probability of correspondence to pro-regenerative reindeer fibroblasts, whereas in later gestation, the probability of matching to pro-fibrotic fibroblasts was higher (Extended Data Fig. 8d and Supplementary Table 19). Accordingly, several pro-regenerative genes (for example, CRABP1 and MDK) were downregulated in late gestation prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 8e and Supplementary Table 20). Notably, prenatal skin macrophages resembled ‘early macrophages’ that are enriched in reindeer antler skin but not macrophages in back skin (Extended Data Fig. 8f and Supplementary Table 21).

The WTC-mEGFP-DSP-cl65 iPS cell line and the WA25 ES cell lines were obtained under a material transfer agreement with the Coriell or WiCell Institute. These lines were determined to have a normal karyotype before SkO differentiation.

Human developmental tissue samples used for this study were obtained from the MRC– Wellcome Trust-funded Human Developmental Biology Resource (http://www.hdbr.org) with approval from the Newcastle and North Tyneside NHS Health Authority Joint Ethics Committee (08/H0906/21+5) and East of England–Cambridge Central Research Ethics Committee (NHS REC 96/085). Prenatal skin for immunofluorescence imaging of proteins causing congenital skin disorders were obtained with approval from the Guy’s and St Thomas’ Hospital Trust Ethics Committee. For samples used for 3D rendering in the Koehler Laboratory, fetal tissue specimens were obtained from the Birth Defects Research Laboratory at the University of Washington (UW) with approval from the UW institutional review board Committee, and the study was performed in accordance with ethical and legal guidelines of the Boston Children’s Hospital institutional review board.

Notably, WNT2+ and PEAR1+ prenatal fibroblasts expressed several genes involved in cellular senescence (CDKN1A), cytokine pathways (for example, IL1R1) and collagen deposition (for example, POSTN) (Fig. 3a,b), which are highly expressed in pathogenic fibroblasts of fibrotic skin disorders. These results provide further support for our finding of progressive acquisition of scar-promoting genes in later gestation, consistent with the clinical observation of scarring in third trimester skin.

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29). Inferred trajectory analysis showed that early endothelial cells in prenatal skin differentiated into either an arteriolar pathway (capillaries, capillary arterioles and arterioles) or venular pathway (postcapillary venules and venules), with expression of characteristic genes (for example, GJA5 for arteriolar and PLVAP for venular) (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a–c). Unlike SkO capillary arteriole cells, prenatal skin capillary arteriole cells could further differentiate into arterioles (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a).

Prenatal skin interfaces with the amniotic fluid in a sterile environment. However, immune cells such as macrophages seed the skin as early as 6 PCW and express a range of pro-inflammatory genes, although genes relating to antigen presentation (for example, major histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII)) are only upregulated after 11 PCW. Decoupling of the expression of pro-inflammatory genes from MHCII genes before 11 PCW suggests that antigen presentation may not be a key function of human macrophages during early gestation. Together with evidence of their role in tissue homeostasis, and healing in mouse models,, this raises the question of whether macrophages contribute to human early skin morphogenesis.

The PySCENIC package (v.0.11.2) and pipeline were used to identify TFs and their target genes in the combined prenatal skin and SkO scRNA-seq datasets. The ranking database (hg38 refseq-r80 500bp_up_and_100bp_down_tss.mc9nr.feather), motif annotation database (motifs-v9-nr.hgnc-m0.001-o0.0.tbl) were downloaded from the Aert’s laboratory GitHub page. The tool was run 10 times, with a dataset comprising at most 1,000 cells per cell type × tissue pair (where tissue is prenatal skin or SkO). For each run, an adjacency matrix of TFs and their targets was generated and pruned using the Aert’s group suggested parameters. Only regulons present in at least 6 out of 10 runs were used in the analysis. PySCENIC was used to calculate the regulon specificity score for each cell type × tissue pair using the aucell function. An average was computed over the multiple runs. These average scores were used to compare regulon activity between prenatal skin and SkO.

For visualization, the adult skin dataset was randomly downsampled to 10% (overall or by cell lineage) and resultant LR probabilistic relationship between labels of the training and target datasets were plotted as heatmaps (Extended Data Fig. 2d).

This led us to infer a potential contribution of macrophages in scarless healing in prenatal skin. Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1+ macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2+ fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair,.

4a); n = 15 biological replicates with a minimum of n = 2 technical replicates for prenatal skin immunofluorescence slides with each of the following antibodies: anti-KRT1, anti-KRT14, anti-plectin, anti-BP180, anti-laminin-332 and anti-type VII collagen (Extended Data Fig. 6e); n = 3 biological replicates for prenatal skin whole-mount immunofluorescence with anti-CD31 and anti-LYVE1 (Fig. 4a); whole-mount immunostaining of SkO co-culture with and without macrophages was performed on n = 5 SkOs without macrophages and n = 5 SkOs with macrophages (Fig. 4f); immunostaining of cryosections of SkOs co-cultured with macrophages was performed on n = 2 SkOs (Fig. 4h).