Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation 1 . Within the dermal compartment, we observed HF-specialized fibroblasts, the dermal condensate (Dc) and dermal papilla (Dp), from 12 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c). 

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs 20 (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (T reg ) cells 21 , and in control of autoimmunity (CD24) 22 . This result highlighted the potential role of T reg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). T reg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin 23,24 . , adult healthy skin 10 and hair-bearing SkO 1 were integrated for comparison. Spatial experiments were carried out using RNAscope, immunofluorescence and Visium analyses. Findings of the study were functionally validated using a SkO co-culture. b, Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization of the prenatal skin dataset with broad annotation of cell states, as denoted by colour and number in the legend. c, Milo beeswarm plot showing the differential abundance of neighbourhoods in prenatal skin across gestation time, annotated by broad cell labels. Red and blue neighbourhoods are significantly enriched in earlier or later gestation, respectively. Colour intensity denotes degree of significance. d, Dotplot showing spatial microenvironments (MEs). Cell type to microenvironment coefficients are normalized by cell type sums, and cell type to microenvironment assignment is shown by colour. ME5, which shows co-locating macrophages and endothelial cells, is highlighted (grey).

Human prenatal skin is populated by innate immune cells, including macrophages, but whether they act solely in immunity or have additional functions in morphogenesis is unclear. Here we assembled a comprehensive multi-omics reference atlas of prenatal human skin (7–17 post-conception weeks), combining single-cell and spatial transcriptomics data, to characterize the microanatomical tissue niches of the skin. This atlas revealed that crosstalk between non-immune and immune cells underpins the formation of hair follicles, is implicated in scarless wound healing and is crucial for skin angiogenesis. We systematically compared a hair-bearing skin organoid (SkO) model derived from human embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells to prenatal and adult skin1. The SkO model closely recapitulated in vivo skin epidermal and dermal cell types during hair follicle development and expression of genes implicated in the pathogenesis of genetic hair and skin disorders. However, the SkO model lacked immune cells and had markedly reduced endothelial cell heterogeneity and quantity. Our in vivo prenatal skin cell atlas indicated that macrophages and macrophage-derived growth factors have a role in driving endothelial development. Indeed, vascular network remodelling was enhanced following transfer of autologous macrophages derived from induced pluripotent stem cells into SkO cultures. Innate immune cells are therefore key players in skin morphogenesis beyond their conventional role in immunity, a function they achieve through crosstalk with non-immune cells. A comprehensive multi-omics reference atlas of prenatal human skin shows that innate immune cells crosstalk with non-immune cells to perform pivotal roles in skin morphogenesis, including the formation of hair follicles.

A combination of fibroblast and macrophage-associated molecular features potentially contribute to the ability of prenatal skin to heal without scarring, including the presence of fibroblast progenitors, a downregulated immune milieu and reduced collagen expression. However, we found progressive 'ageing' and acquisition of the adult 'pro-inflammatory' phenotype as early as 9 PCW, which could be targeted in fibroblasts to guide postnatal scarless healing. Future studies that align human fibroblast subsets across the lifespan are required to investigate the dynamics of scarless healing and the roles of mechanical forces, microbiota and environmental exposure on fibroblast functions. 

Our prenatal human skin atlas represents a valuable resource to explore genes that cause congenital hair and skin disorders and is freely accessible from our web portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/ fetal-skin). We found that implicated genes are indeed expressed during prenatal skin development and HF differentiation, thereby supporting an in utero origin for these disorders. Our systematic prenatal skin-SkO comparison provides a blueprint to guide more faithful in vitro SkO generation, which can facilitate future studies of interactions with the microbiota, the pathogenesis of congenital skin disorders, and hair and skin engineering for therapeutic applications, including hair regeneration and skin transplant.

3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7). Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell-cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration [30][31][32] (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells 33,34 . 

We explored the mesenchymal-epithelial interactions that instruct early HF formation. Receptor-ligand analysis predicted interactions between CXCL12 expressed by pre-Dc cells (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h) with ACKR3 on epidermal basal cells (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Table 8). RNAscope analysis confirmed that these two genes co-located (Fig. 2h). This result suggests that CXCL12 probably interacts with ACKR3 to mediate the migration of pre-Dc cells 31,35 . Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand-receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12-CXCR4 and CXCL12-DPP4) 35,36  The Dc, for which formation is accompanied by invagination of the placode, expressed FAM3C and EFNB1, which were, respectively, predicted to interact with LAMP1 or CXADR and EPHB6 on the placode, and have been reported to promote cell migration and invasion 37,38 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8).

Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand-receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12-CXCR4 and CXCL12-DPP4) 35,36  The Dc, for which formation is accompanied by invagination of the placode, expressed FAM3C and EFNB1, which were, respectively, predicted to interact with LAMP1 or CXADR and EPHB6 on the placode, and have been reported to promote cell migration and invasion 37,38 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8). Finally, RSPO3 from the Dp was predicted to interact with LGR4 and LGR6 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8) in overlying matrix cells to contribute to the proliferation of HF epithelial cells 33 . Notably, the highlighted interactions were conserved between the mesenchymal and epithelial cells of the SkO model for corresponding stages during HF formation (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 8). These results provide orthogonal validation of our findings and reinforce the utility of the SkO as an accurate model of prenatal skin development. 

We further evaluated the differentiation trajectory alignment between prenatal skin and the SkO model using the Genes2Genes analysis framework 39 to compare the expression of transcription factors (TFs) along the hair fibroblast trajectory. Overall, we observed a high number of matching TFs across pseudotime, which indicated that there are similar activated gene regulatory programs between prenatal skin and SkO during HF fibroblast differentiation (Fig. 2i and Supplementary Table 9). TFs that were mismatched across pseudotime or drove misalignment in early and late pseudotime (for example, HOXA7 and BARX1) were largely attributable to the different origins of dermal cells between prenatal skin (trunk and limb) and SkO (neural crest differentiation) 40 (Extended Data Fig. 5d,e and Supplementary Table 9).

A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2 + basal, POSTN + basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g). The same analysis was performed to obtain the top 10 interactions in SkO HFs (Extended Data Fig. 5c), defining early/late to match corresponding cell states as in prenatal skin. The top 10 interactions identified in prenatal skin HFs were also plotted within the SkO data to highlight similarities and differences between the two (Fig. 2g). 

Comparison with adult fibroblasts. Integrated scRNA-seq data from prenatal skin and adult healthy skin (with original annotations) 10 was subsetted to the cell group of interest (fibroblasts). DEGs between the adult and prenatal skin fibroblasts were derived using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test implementation in scanpy and adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (scanpy.tl.rank_genes_ groups, method = "wilcoxon", corr_method = "benjamini-hochberg"). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the top 1,000 genes in each group ranked by scores (Supplementary Table 13) and the implementation of the Enrichr workflow 102 in the Python package GSEApy (https://gseapy.readthedocs.io/; v.0.10.7) with Gene Ontology Biological Process (2021) as the query database (Supplementary Tables 14, 15). A selected list of genes was plotted to highlight differences between prenatal and adult skin fibroblasts. 

Gene set enrichment analysis.

Having mapped the differentiation of prenatal skin HFs, we leveraged this information to assess the extent to which genetic hair diseases have their roots in utero. Genes harbouring mutations known to cause reduced hair growth (hypotrichosis) or abnormally shaped hair (for example, pili torti) (Supplementary Table 12) were expressed along the ORS/CL trajectory, IRS trajectory and hair fibroblast trajectory pseudotimes (Extended Data Figs. 4f and 6a,b) and in prenatal HF cell Article states (Extended Data Fig. 6c). This finding suggested that these disorders result from dysfunctional HF development. 

Genes causing epidermolysis bullosa (EB), an inherited blistering skin disorder characterized by skin fragility secondary to structural defects in the epidermis and adjacent dermoepidermal junction 45 , were highly expressed in prenatal epidermal cells and at the dermoepidermal junction (Extended Data Fig. 6d,e). Gene therapy studies for dystrophic EB have identified fibroblasts expressing COL7A1 as a promising therapeutic strategy 46 . We observed COL7A1 expression across several fibroblast subsets in prenatal skin and SkOs (Extended Data Fig. 6d), which lends support to the gene therapy approaches. The expression of genes implicated in congenital ichthyoses, a group of disorders resulting from abnormal epidermal differentiation 47 , were primarily confined to keratinocytes (Extended Data Fig. 6f). 

Notably, we observed similar gene expression patterns across prenatal skin and SkO for the above described genetic hair and skin disorders (Extended Data Fig. 6c,d,f), which supported the value of the SkO as a model to study congenital diseases. Although we found that expression of genes implicated in these disorders are confined to structural cells, disease manifestations are often associated with immune infiltration, which implicates skin-immune crosstalk during pathogenesis 48,49 .

By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the SkO model recapitulated the different components of prenatal skin HF, interfollicular epidermis, neural cells and dermal fibroblasts, but immune cells were not represented and endothelial cells were markedly reduced.

The precise mechanisms of de novo HF formation in human embryonic development are largely inferred from mouse studies 16 . Human studies have primarily focused on morphological descriptions during development 17 or cycling HFs in adult skin 18 . Our single-cell dataset captured the onset of HF formation, which enabled direct comparison between prenatal developing HFs and adult cycling HFs. 

Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14-15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a). 

Consistent with our histological observations, we identified HF cells from 14 PCW in our scRNA-seq data, which comprised placode, matrix (SHH + ), outer root sheath (ORS) (SLC26A7 + ), companion layer (CL), inner root sheath (IRS) and cuticle and cortex cells (cuticle/cortex; part of the inner layers of the HF) (Fig. 2a-c, Extended Data Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Table 6). In addition, we observed immature and mature interfollicular epidermal (IFE) cells. Immature IFE cells, including periderm, immature basal and immature suprabasal cells, were present from 7 PCW and decreased after 11 PCW, during the transition from embryonic to fetal skin (Fig. 2b). Mature basal (DPYSL2 + ) and suprabasal IFE cells increased after 11 PCW, whereas POSTN + basal cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3b). Sebaceous and apocrine gland cells, which mature after 16 PCW 19 , were not captured at these stages. Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation 1 .

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA + FOXD1 + SOX2 low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1 + SOX2 + ), which abuts the epithelial hair placode 26,28 . Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin 28,29 . Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP + , SOX2 + ) 26,28 (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h). 

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB + fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5 + early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2 + fibroblasts and PEAR1 + fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

In this study, we characterized the dynamic composition of human prenatal skin during the early stages of de novo HF formation and highlighted the crucial skin immune and non-immune crosstalk that contributes to skin morphogenesis, results that are in line with emerging evidence in animal and human studies 69,75 . Our atlas indicated that macrophages contribute to scarless skin repair, fibroblast homeostasis and neurovascular development. This is in part contributed to by yolk-sac derived TML macrophages, which suggests that these cells have broader functions outside the central nervous system in early gestation. The presence of TML macrophages has previously been identified in several prenatal organs 5,58,69 . 

Successful co-culture with immune cells has been demonstrated in some organoid systems 76,77 . We identified a crucial role of macrophages in vascular network remodelling after adding macrophages to hair-bearing iPS cell-derived SkOs. Not only is this important for our understanding of the diverse cellular interactions that mediate morphogenesis but it also has practical implications for in vitro models, which commonly fail to vascularize 78 . Our study provides further insights into human HF formation and the origin of the CL, which seems to develop along the same trajectory as the ORS. These findings are consistent with recent results from mouse studies 26,79 , which showed that CL development occurs before hair matrix formation 79 and there is greater transcriptional similarity of CL cells to ORS cells 25 . Although we note similarities between human and mouse in the signalling pathways co-ordinating HF formation, our study reveals key cross-species distinctions in the differentiation tempo of HF mesenchymal cells. Future studies are required to fully delineate the features that distinguish human skin development.

ME5, which shows co-locating macrophages and endothelial cells, is highlighted (grey). e, UMAP visualizations of the integrated prenatal skin, adult skin 10 and SkO 1 datasets, coloured by broad cell lineages. ASDC, Axl + Siglec6 + dendritic cells; DC, dendritic cells; HSC, haematopoietic stem cells; LC, Langerhans cells; LE, lymphatic endothelium; LTi, lymphoid tissue inducer cell; MEMP, megakaryocyte-erythroidmast cell progenitor; NK cell, natural killer cells; pDC, plasmacytoid dendritic cells. The images in a were created using BioRender (https://biorender.com). Inferred trajectory and pseudotime analysis of epidermal cells in the integrated prenatal skin and SkO data predicted the differentiation of POSTN + basal cells into two paths: ORS/CL trajectory, comprising DPYSL2 + basal cells, ORS and CL; and IRS trajectory, involving placode, matrix, cuticle/cortex and IRS (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 7). Along the ORS/CL trajectory, we identified new genes upregulated by DPYSL2 + basal cells, such as AGR2, and previously reported genes related to ORS differentiation (BARX2 and SOX9) 25,26 (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). AGR2 was downregulated along the IRS trajectory, whereas known matrix markers such as SHH and WNT10B 25,26 were upregulated (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). Loss of AGR2, which functions in the assembly of cysteine-rich receptors enriched in HFs, promotes cell migration 27 . Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN + basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

The subsampled dataset were analysed separately using the permutation-based method to establish significance (P value cut-off = 0.05). For the analysis by early/late gestation, the prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset was first split into early (≤11 PCW) and late (≥12 PCW) gestation datasets, which were then subsampled (no more than 200 cells per cell type) and individually analysed (P value cut-off = 0.05). A summary output file was created for each analysis run, compiling the interactions for each cell pair (P < 0.05) and adjusting P values for multiple testing (FDR set at 0.05) (Supplementary Tables 8  and 28). Circos plots (Circlize package (v.0.4.15) 101 ) were used for downstream visualizations of selected significant (adjusted P value < 0.05) interactions between co-locating cell types for interactions found in all subsampled analyses. 

To explore inferred interactions between macrophage subsets and endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 9a), we aggregated the interactions predicted for each macrophage subset and the different subtypes of endothelial cells (early endothelial cells, arterioles, capillary arterioles, capillaries, postcapillary venules and venules) by averaging the means and using the minimum of the adjusted P values as previously described 5 . A curated list of aggregated interactions were plotted for visualization using ggplot2 (v. 3.3.6). A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2 + basal, POSTN + basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g).

To characterize the role of distinct lineages and cell states during human prenatal skin development, we obtained single-cell suspensions of skin from 7 to 17 PCW, spanning the first and second trimesters (Fig. 1a). We performed fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to isolate live, single immune (CD45 + ) and non-immune (CD45 -) populations and to enhance keratinocyte and endothelial cell capture before scRNA-seq profiling (Extended Data Fig. 1a and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Single-cell αβ T cell receptor (TCR) sequencing data were generated to accurately resolve T cell subsets. Spatial validation was carried out using multiplex RNA in situ hybridization (RNAscope), newly generated spatial transcriptomics (Visium) data from embryonic facial and abdominal skin, and published Visium data from embryonic limb from which only skin areas were analysed 12 (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 2). In addition, we integrated new and published single-cell datasets of adult skin 10 and of a hair-bearing SkO model derived from human embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells 1 for comparative analysis (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 2). We also compared in vivo prenatal and organoid HFs with scRNA-seq data of adult HFs 11 . Our data can be interactively explored through our WebAtlas-based 13 portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-skin). The analysis software for this study is archived at Zenodo (https://doi. org/10.5281/zenodo.8164271) 14 . 

Our prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset comprised 534,581 cells, of which 433,961 cells passed quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1b). Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3).

Macrophages have been implicated in angiogenesis during prenatal organ development and in the postnatal setting such as cancerrelated angiogenesis 67,68 . Furthermore, macrophages expressing pro-angiogenic genes have been observed in diverse tissues during human development 69 . Visium deconvolution analysis predicted co-location of prenatal skin macrophages with endothelial cells ('early and late neurovascular microenvironments', ME1 and ME5) (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e). Gene ontology analysis showed that the four macrophage subsets (LYVE1 + , MHCII + , TML and iron-recycling) expressed gene programs that drive angiogenesis (Supplementary Tables 23-26). Gene module expression profiles suggested that sprouting angiogenesis (growth of new vessels) was promoted by LYVE1 + and TML macrophages, blood vessel morphogenesis by LYVE1 + macrophages and endothelial cell chemotaxis by iron-recycling macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 8i and Supplementary Table 27). Consistent with this finding, multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining showed LYVE1 + and TML macrophages in close proximity to endothelial cells (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Video 1). Predicted ligandreceptor interactions were consistent with reciprocal communication between macrophages and endothelial cells to support angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell migration (for example, CXCL8-ACKR1 and CCL8-ACKR1) 10,70 (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 28). 

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29).

Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). NMF can predict significant cellular co-locations that are not readily evident in conventional histopathology analyses 5,15 . Our analysis predicted distinct microenvironments in prenatal skin comprising epidermal, dermal, vascular and neural cells, each including specific types of immune cells (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in 'early and late neurovascular microenvironments' (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation. 

We next integrated and compared human prenatal and adult skin data 10 with the SkO model 1 . The aim was to determine the extent to which the SkO model recapitulates human skin differentiation at a molecular level and its potential utility to functionally assess the role of immune cells in skin morphogenesis (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a,b). Broadly, cell states were conserved among SkO, prenatal and adult skin, but SkO cell states matched prenatal skin more closely than adult skin across culture duration (Extended Data Fig. 2c,d and Supplementary Table 5). However, the tempo of differentiation varied across the distinct skin cell lineages. Even after 19 weeks of culture, fibroblasts, mural and Schwann cells had a low probability of correspondence to adult skin cell states (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5).

The tool was run 10 times, with a dataset comprising at most 1,000 cells per cell type × tissue pair (where tissue is prenatal skin or SkO). For each run, an adjacency matrix of TFs and their targets was generated and pruned using the Aert's group suggested parameters. Only regulons present in at least 6 out of 10 runs were used in the analysis. PySCENIC was used to calculate the regulon specificity score for each cell type × tissue pair using the aucell function. An average was computed over the multiple runs. These average scores were used to compare regulon activity between prenatal skin and SkO. A gene interaction network was first built by querying the STRING database with GATA2 target genes, then pruned to only keep genes reported as associated with GATA2. The list was further truncated to 12 genes, by keeping genes that met the following criteria: (1) TFs in the five most active regulons detected in fetal skin; and/or (2) organoid capillary arterioles; and/or (3) associated with pseudotime (that is, in trajectories); and/or (4) VEGF receptors; and/or (5) in the selected gene ontology terms chosen for their role in angiogenesis, extracellular matrix organization, or cell migration, communication, proliferation, or death (GO:0045765, GO:0001568, GO:0030334, GO:0010646, GO:0001936, GO:0045446, GO:0002040, GO:0030155, GO:0010941 and GO:0030198). 

Comparison of pro-angiogenic and anti-angiogenic genes between prenatal skin and SkO. The prenatal skin and SkO datasets were integrated using Harmony (v.0.0.5) 91 as described above. Differential expression analysis was performed between prenatal skin and SkO cells (all cell types) using the standard scanpy workflow (scanpy. tl.rank_genes_groups, method = "wilcoxon").

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. (e) Gene expression plots for representative genes in prenatal skin (green) and SkO (blue) across pseudotime. Left column: the interpolated log1p transformed expression (y-axis) against pseudotime (x-axis). and percent of expressing cells (dot size) of marker genes 5 used to annotate macrophage subsets in prenatal skin. (g) Circos plot visualisation of representative significant (adjusted p-value <0.05, significance calculated in CellphoneDB using empirical shuffling and FDR-adjusted) predicted interactions between macrophages (LYVE1 + and TML macrophage) and co-localising WNT2 + fibroblasts in prenatal skin. Arrows represent directionality of interactions (ligand to receptor); connection width is proportional to the CellphoneDB mean value for each ligand-receptor pair. ASDC, Axl + Siglec6 + dendritic cells; DC, dendritic cells; LC, Langerhans cells. between embryonic immune cells (x-axis) and prenatal skin (y-axis) myeloid cell states for a logistic regression model trained on embryonic data 57 and projected onto prenatal skin myeloid cell subset. TML macrophage had the highest proportion prediction to Mac4 (embryonic brain microglia). (c) Gene set enrichment analysis results of over-expressed genes (wilcoxon, two-sided, Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted) in macrophage subsets (TML, Iron-recycling, LYVE1 + and MHCII + , macrophages). Each plot shows the top 10 enriched gene sets (using Gene Ontology Biological Process 2023 (left) and MSigDB Hallmark 2020 (right) databases). The x-axis shows the negative log

TML macrophages were also predicted to co-locate with Schwann cells in prenatal skin ('early neurovascular microenvironment', ME1) (Figs. 1d and 3g) and expressed genes related to cell migration and