We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (Treg) cells, and in control of autoimmunity (CD24). This result highlighted the potential role of Treg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). Treg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin,. RNAscope (FOXP3+) and immunofluorescence staining (FOXP3+) showed that Treg cells were primarily located within and around HFs compared to interfollicular skin as early as 15 PCW (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3g,h).

Our prenatal human skin atlas represents a valuable resource to explore genes that cause congenital hair and skin disorders and is freely accessible from our web portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-skin). We found that implicated genes are indeed expressed during prenatal skin development and HF differentiation, thereby supporting an in utero origin for these disorders. Our systematic prenatal skin–SkO comparison provides a blueprint to guide more faithful in vitro SkO generation, which can facilitate future studies of interactions with the microbiota, the pathogenesis of congenital skin disorders, and hair and skin engineering for therapeutic applications, including hair regeneration and skin transplant.

There is, however, a paucity of information about the precise cellular composition of human prenatal skin over these developmental periods and whether cells interact in functional microanatomical niches that support skin morphogenesis.

We next integrated and compared human prenatal and adult skin data with the SkO model. The aim was to determine the extent to which the SkO model recapitulates human skin differentiation at a molecular level and its potential utility to functionally assess the role of immune cells in skin morphogenesis (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a,b). Broadly, cell states were conserved among SkO, prenatal and adult skin, but SkO cell states matched prenatal skin more closely than adult skin across culture duration (Extended Data Fig. 2c,d and Supplementary Table 5). However, the tempo of differentiation varied across the distinct skin cell lineages. Even after 19 weeks of culture, fibroblasts, mural and Schwann cells had a low probability of correspondence to adult skin cell states (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5).

Notably, we observed similar gene expression patterns across prenatal skin and SkO for the above described genetic hair and skin disorders (Extended Data Fig. 6c,d,f), which supported the value of the SkO as a model to study congenital diseases. Although we found that expression of genes implicated in these disorders are confined to structural cells, disease manifestations are often associated with immune infiltration, which implicates skin–immune crosstalk during pathogenesis,.

Human skin organogenesis begins after gastrulation from two primary germ layers. The epidermis, the most superficial layer of the skin, melanocytes and neural cells arise from the ectoderm. The dermis, which is separated from the epidermis by the basement membrane and contains endothelial and mural cells, derives from the mesoderm (apart from facial and cranial skin, where it arises from ectoderm-derived neural crest cells). The skin appendages, which include hair follicles (HFs) and sebaceous glands, form in a cephalocaudal direction. Prenatal HFs start forming between 11 and 14 post-conception weeks (PCW), initiated by interactions between epidermal placodes (focal sites of epidermal layer thickening) and dermal condensates (aggregates of dermal fibroblasts), whereas sebaceous glands develop from around 16 PCW.

Our prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset comprised 534,581 cells, of which 433,961 cells passed quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1b). Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3). Differential abundance analysis testing revealed how different cell populations varied across gestation. Among ectoderm-derived cells, neural cells and the periderm, which constitutes the first skin permeability barrier, were enriched in early gestation, whereas suprabasal epidermal and HF cells were mainly observed in later gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Mesoderm-derived cells, including skin fibroblasts and endothelial cells, and immune cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4).

Prenatal skin cells and organoid cells were integrated using Harmony (v.0.0.5), treating datasets as batches (prenatal skin or organoid) and within dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal skin, strain for SkO, and 10x kit version for both datasets). Leiden clusters were annotated using known markers.

Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14–15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a).

In this study, we characterized the dynamic composition of human prenatal skin during the early stages of de novo HF formation and highlighted the crucial skin immune and non-immune crosstalk that contributes to skin morphogenesis, results that are in line with emerging evidence in animal and human studies,. Our atlas indicated that macrophages contribute to scarless skin repair, fibroblast homeostasis and neurovascular development. This is in part contributed to by yolk-sac derived TML macrophages, which suggests that these cells have broader functions outside the central nervous system in early gestation. The presence of TML macrophages has previously been identified in several prenatal organs,,.

For comparison of the prenatal skin macrophages with embryonic macrophages, the embryonic macrophage dataset was used as training data and prenatal skin macrophages as query; for comparison of the blood vessel organoid with prenatal skin, the prenatal skin dataset (downsampled to maximum of 500 cells per cell type) was used as training data and the blood vessel organoid data as query; for comparison of HF data, merged prenatal and organoid data were used as training data and adult dataset as query; for comparison of the prenatal skin fibroblasts and macrophages with reindeer skin fibroblasts and macrophages, the reindeer skin data subsets were used as training data and prenatal skin data subsets as query.

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29). Inferred trajectory analysis showed that early endothelial cells in prenatal skin differentiated into either an arteriolar pathway (capillaries, capillary arterioles and arterioles) or venular pathway (postcapillary venules and venules), with expression of characteristic genes (for example, GJA5 for arteriolar and PLVAP for venular) (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a–c). Unlike SkO capillary arteriole cells, prenatal skin capillary arteriole cells could further differentiate into arterioles (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a).

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB+ fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5+ early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2+ fibroblasts and PEAR1+ fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

To compare prenatal skin cells with external datasets (adult HF, embryonic macrophages, blood vessel organoid, reindeer skin),,,, the datasets were downsampled to have roughly balanced cell counts per annotated cell type before integration with Harmony (v.0.0.5), treating datasets as batches and within dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal skin, site for embryonic macrophages, group (cell line: day of culture) for blood vessel organoid, chemistry for reindeer skin).

CellPhoneDB (v.3.0.0) package was used to infer cell–cell interactions within the prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset overall and in early/late gestation and within the SkO scRNA-seq dataset overall. In the overall analysis, we randomly subsampled each cell type into no more than 200 cells 3 separate times, using all cells if a population contained fewer than 200 cells and excluding populations with fewer than 10 cells. The subsampled dataset were analysed separately using the permutation-based method to establish significance (P value cut-off = 0.05). For the analysis by early/late gestation, the prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset was first split into early (≤11 PCW) and late (≥12 PCW) gestation datasets, which were then subsampled (no more than 200 cells per cell type) and individually analysed (P value cut-off = 0.05).

The number of cells of each cell type was then counted in each neighbourhood (milopy.core.count_nhoods). Labels were assigned to each neighbourhood based on majority voting (milopy.utils.annotate_nhoods) of cell labels by frequency (>50%). To test for differential abundance across gestational age, prenatal skin data were split into 4 age bins (7–8 PCW, 9–10 PCW, 11–13 PCW and 15–17 PCW), and cell counts were modelled using a negative binomial generalized model, with Benjamini–Hochberg weighted correction as previously described,, to test the effects of age (age bins) together with cell sorting correction (milopy.core.DA_nhoods). Significantly differentially abundant neighbourhoods were detected using (SpatialFDR < 0.1, log(fold change) < 0) for early enriched neighbourhoods and (SpatialFDR < 0.1, log(fold change) > 0) for late neighborhoods (Supplementary Table 4).

Collectively, our findings suggest that prenatal skin fibroblasts in early gestation downregulate genes involved in extracellular matrix formation, collagen deposition and inflammation, which may favour tissue regeneration over scarring. Based on our data and previous studies, we also posit a potential role for early skin macrophages in conferring the distinct property of scarless healing in early prenatal skin. However, further studies are required to fully elucidate the interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts in human prenatal skin and to conclusively establish their role in scarless healing.

Consistent with our histological observations, we identified HF cells from 14 PCW in our scRNA-seq data, which comprised placode, matrix (SHH+), outer root sheath (ORS) (SLC26A7+), companion layer (CL), inner root sheath (IRS) and cuticle and cortex cells (cuticle/cortex; part of the inner layers of the HF) (Fig. 2a–c, Extended Data Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Table 6). In addition, we observed immature and mature interfollicular epidermal (IFE) cells. Immature IFE cells, including periderm, immature basal and immature suprabasal cells, were present from 7 PCW and decreased after 11 PCW, during the transition from embryonic to fetal skin (Fig. 2b). Mature basal (DPYSL2+) and suprabasal IFE cells increased after 11 PCW, whereas POSTN+ basal cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3b). Sebaceous and apocrine gland cells, which mature after 16 PCW, were not captured at these stages.

We further compared prenatal skin fibroblasts and macrophages to their counterparts in reindeer skin from antlers, which heal without scarring, and in back skin, which scars. Early-gestation human skin fibroblasts had a higher probability of correspondence to pro-regenerative reindeer fibroblasts, whereas in later gestation, the probability of matching to pro-fibrotic fibroblasts was higher (Extended Data Fig. 8d and Supplementary Table 19). Accordingly, several pro-regenerative genes (for example, CRABP1 and MDK) were downregulated in late gestation prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 8e and Supplementary Table 20). Notably, prenatal skin macrophages resembled ‘early macrophages’ that are enriched in reindeer antler skin but not macrophages in back skin (Extended Data Fig. 8f and Supplementary Table 21).

TML macrophages were also predicted to co-locate with Schwann cells in prenatal skin (‘early neurovascular microenvironment’, ME1) (Figs. 1d and 3g) and expressed genes related to cell migration and neural development (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 22 and 23), which mirrored the functions of brain microglia and peripheral nerve-associated macrophages in mouse skin. TML macrophages were predicted to interact with Schwann cells, contributing to synapse formation and axon guidance (VEGFA–NRP1, VEGFA–NRP2, SEMA3C–NRP2 and SEMA3E–PLXND1) (Extended Data Fig. 8h and Supplementary Table 8). These findings suggest that prenatal skin macrophages may support the establishment of the skin peripheral nervous system during early gestation, as previously reported in mouse skin.

A combination of fibroblast and macrophage-associated molecular features potentially contribute to the ability of prenatal skin to heal without scarring, including the presence of fibroblast progenitors, a downregulated immune milieu and reduced collagen expression. However, we found progressive ‘ageing’ and acquisition of the adult ‘pro-inflammatory’ phenotype as early as 9 PCW, which could be targeted in fibroblasts to guide postnatal scarless healing. Future studies that align human fibroblast subsets across the lifespan are required to investigate the dynamics of scarless healing and the roles of mechanical forces, microbiota and environmental exposure on fibroblast functions.

Prenatal human skin is able to heal without scarring but loses this capacity after 24 PCW. Scars result from aggregation of collagen produced by dermal fibroblasts and failure of the overlying epidermis to completely regenerate. To identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms that may endow early prenatal skin with scarless healing properties, we investigated the temporal changes in composition and transcriptional profile of the dermal fibroblast subsets (Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7a). We first compared prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts with healthy adult skin fibroblasts. All adult fibroblast subsets expressed high levels of inflammatory cytokines and receptors (for example, IL6 and IL1RA) and genes involved in antigen presentation (for example, HLA-A), innate immune and inflammatory responses (for example, CD55 and PTGES) and cellular senescence (CDKN1A) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13–15).

Target genes of interest were identified as DEGs between conditions (prenatal skin versus SkO) in receiver cells using FindMarkers function in NicheNet (adjusted P value ≤ 0.05 and average log2(fold change) > 0.25, expressed in at least 10% of endothelial cells). Background genes were all genes in the NicheNet model that were expressed in at least 10% of receiver cells.

By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the SkO model recapitulated the different components of prenatal skin HF, interfollicular epidermis, neural cells and dermal fibroblasts, but immune cells were not represented and endothelial cells were markedly reduced.

We next investigated additional mechanisms for failed expansion and differentiation of SkO endothelial cells. Expression of genes and gene modules related to blood flow and hypoxia were lower in SkO than in prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 10e,f and Supplementary Table 29). However, sprouting angiogenesis potential, assessed by scoring the ‘tip’ cell state, was increased in both SkO capillary arteriole cells and prenatal skin arteriole, capillary arteriole and capillary cells (Extended Data Fig. 10g,h). This suggests that despite strong expression of the sprouting angiogenesis gene signature, SkO capillary arteriole cells are unable to guide stalk cells for new blood vessel formation.

Prenatal facial (n = 1, replicate = 2) and abdominal skin (n = 1, replicate = 2) samples from a single donor at 10 PCW were embedded in optimal cutting temperature (OCT) medium and flash-frozen in isopentane cooled with dry ice. Cryosections (10 µm) from the OCT blocks were cut onto 10x Genomics Visium slides. Sections were stained with haematoxylin and eosin and imaged at ×20 magnification on a Hamamatsu Nanozoomer. These sections were then processed according to the 10x Genomics Visium protocol, using a permeabilization time of 12 min found through a previous tissue optimization step. Dual-indexed libraries were prepared as per the manufacturer’s protocol, pooled at 2.8 nM and sequenced in 8 samples per Illumina Novaseq S4 flow cell with the following run parameters: read 1: 28 cycles; i7 index: 10 cycles; i5 index: 10 cycles; read 2: 90 cycles.

The PySCENIC package (v.0.11.2) and pipeline were used to identify TFs and their target genes in the combined prenatal skin and SkO scRNA-seq datasets. The ranking database (hg38 refseq-r80 500bp_up_and_100bp_down_tss.mc9nr.feather), motif annotation database (motifs-v9-nr.hgnc-m0.001-o0.0.tbl) were downloaded from the Aert’s laboratory GitHub page. The tool was run 10 times, with a dataset comprising at most 1,000 cells per cell type × tissue pair (where tissue is prenatal skin or SkO). For each run, an adjacency matrix of TFs and their targets was generated and pruned using the Aert’s group suggested parameters. Only regulons present in at least 6 out of 10 runs were used in the analysis. PySCENIC was used to calculate the regulon specificity score for each cell type × tissue pair using the aucell function. An average was computed over the multiple runs. These average scores were used to compare regulon activity between prenatal skin and SkO.

This result suggests that for corresponding cell types, HF fibroblasts are in a more differentiated state in mouse compared to human prenatal skin. Additionally, dermal fibroblast differentiation into histologically defined subsets (papillary and reticular) has been reported to occur early in mice (about embryonic day 12.5). Our human prenatal skin fibroblasts did not significantly express papillary fibroblast markers (for example, COL13A1) (Extended Data Fig. 5j), which suggested that the distinction between papillary and reticular fibroblasts emerges after 17 PCW. These distinctions between human and mouse skin may be attributed to organismal differences in gestation lengths and tempo of differentiation. Cellular differentiation occurs at a quicker pace in mice, whereas the longer gestation period in humans permits more advanced maturation to take place in utero.

Our current study provides a comprehensive multi-omics cell atlas of 7–17 PCW human prenatal skin. We profiled human prenatal skin using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), spatial transcriptomics and multiplex RNA in situ hybridization to decode the dynamic cellular and molecular changes across gestation that regulate skin and HF morphogenesis. We leveraged adult healthy skin and HF datasets, to compare and assess developmental-specific features that contribute to scarless skin healing and cues that guide de novo HF formation. We used a hair-bearing SkO model to validate the role of macrophages in prenatal skin vascular network formation.

Prenatal skin, adult skin and SkO cells were integrated using Harmony (v.0.0.5), treating datasets as batches and within-dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal and adult skin and strain for organoid, 10x kit version for all datasets). The principal component vectors of the downsampled Harmony-integrated object were then used to transform the gene expression matrix (NumPy (v.1.23.4) function ‘linalg.lstsq’, rcond = ‘warn’) of all cells in the non-downsampled pooled data and project for UMAP visualization (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a). The median transformed gene expression was used to compute the Euclidean distance between prenatal skin, adult skin and SkO for each broad cell cluster, using ‘spatial.distance_matrix’ function in SciPy (v.1.9.3), which was then plotted as a heatmap (Extended Data Fig. 2c).

We further evaluated the differentiation trajectory alignment between prenatal skin and the SkO model using the Genes2Genes analysis framework to compare the expression of transcription factors (TFs) along the hair fibroblast trajectory. Overall, we observed a high number of matching TFs across pseudotime, which indicated that there are similar activated gene regulatory programs between prenatal skin and SkO during HF fibroblast differentiation (Fig. 2i and Supplementary Table 9). TFs that were mismatched across pseudotime or drove misalignment in early and late pseudotime (for example, HOXA7 and BARX1) were largely attributable to the different origins of dermal cells between prenatal skin (trunk and limb) and SkO (neural crest differentiation) (Extended Data Fig. 5d,e and Supplementary Table 9).

By contrast, prenatal skin fibroblasts had upregulated genes involved in immune suppression (CD200), regulation of inflammation (for example, RAMP2) and tissue regeneration (MDK) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13–15).

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA+FOXD1+SOX2low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1+SOX2+), which abuts the epithelial hair placode,. Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin,. Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP+, SOX2+), (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h).

Differences in cell abundance associated with gestational age were tested using Milo (v.1.0.0), correcting for CD45+ and CD45– FACS isolation strategies. We first re-embedded cells into a batch-corrected latent space with a dimension of 30 using scVI model as implemented in scvi-tools considering donor and chemistry as batches. The model was trained using the 15,000 most highly variable genes that were selected based on dispersion (min_mean = 0.001, max_mean = 10) as previously described. Where FACS correction was applied, we calculated a FACS isolation correction factor for each sample s sorted with gate i as (fs = log(piS/Si)) where pi is the true proportion of cells from gate i and S represents the total number of cells from both gates. A KNN graph of cells was constructed based on distances in the latent space and cells assigned to neighbourhoods using the milopy.core.make_nhoods function (prop = 0.1).

In addition, we integrated new and published single-cell datasets of adult skin and of a hair-bearing SkO model derived from human embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells for comparative analysis (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 2). We also compared in vivo prenatal and organoid HFs with scRNA-seq data of adult HFs. Our data can be interactively explored through our WebAtlas-based portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-skin). The analysis software for this study is archived at Zenodo (10.5281/zenodo.8164271).

Notably, WNT2+ and PEAR1+ prenatal fibroblasts expressed several genes involved in cellular senescence (CDKN1A), cytokine pathways (for example, IL1R1) and collagen deposition (for example, POSTN) (Fig. 3a,b), which are highly expressed in pathogenic fibroblasts of fibrotic skin disorders. These results provide further support for our finding of progressive acquisition of scar-promoting genes in later gestation, consistent with the clinical observation of scarring in third trimester skin.

To compare gene expression of FRZB in fibroblasts across developing organs, a scRNA-seq stromal dataset from multiple developing organs (available from the Human Developmental Cell Atlas (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-immune)) was used, which also includes our prenatal skin scRNA-seq data. The data were normalized to 1 × 104 counts per cell (scanpy.pp.normalize_total), log1p transformed (scanpy.pp.log1p) and subsetted to fibroblast cell types only to plot expression of FRZB by organ across gestation time.

To locate cells identified from scRNA-seq data in situ, we performed Cell2location analysis of spatial transcriptomics data of facial and abdominal skin (10 PCW) and embryonic lower limb skin (6–8 PCW) (Supplementary Table 2). We assessed cell type co-location using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to computationally predict microenvironments in conjunction with correlation analyses. Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). NMF can predict significant cellular co-locations that are not readily evident in conventional histopathology analyses,. Our analysis predicted distinct microenvironments in prenatal skin comprising epidermal, dermal, vascular and neural cells, each including specific types of immune cells (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f).

The median probability of class correspondence between gene expression matrices in single-cell datasets was carried out using a logistic regression (LR) framework as previously described, based on a similar workflow to CellTypist tool. Annotated raw scRNA-seq datasets (prenatal skin, adult skin and SkO) were first concatenated, normalized and log-transformed. Linear variational autoencoder (VAE) latent representations were computed using the LDVAE module within scvi-tools (hidden layers = 256, dropout-rate = 0.2, reconstruction-loss = negative binomial) with dataset and chemistry information taken as technical covariates. ElasticNet LR models were built using the linear_model.LogisticRegression module in the sklearn package (v.0.22). The models were trained on SCVI batch-corrected low-dimensional LDVAE representation of the training data (prenatal and adult skin) using time-encoded labels (age_cell category).

We also assessed the expression profiles of genes previously reported in mouse HF formation. Similar signalling pathways were upregulated, including WNT and EDA for hair placode specification, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and noggin to inhibit hair formation in IFE cells, and PDGFA and TGFβ signalling for HF down growth (Extended Data Fig. 5f). Additionally, similar to fibroblast differentiation in mouse skin, pre-Dcs, the Dc and Dp and dermal fibroblasts in human prenatal skin also originated from a common fibroblast progenitor (HOXC5+ early fibroblast) (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 4d). However, cross-species data integration of human and mouse HF showed that human pre-Dc cells and the Dc aligned not only to their counterparts in mouse skin but also to fibroblasts in earlier stages of differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 5g–i and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11).

Genes causing epidermolysis bullosa (EB), an inherited blistering skin disorder characterized by skin fragility secondary to structural defects in the epidermis and adjacent dermoepidermal junction, were highly expressed in prenatal epidermal cells and at the dermoepidermal junction (Extended Data Fig. 6d,e). Gene therapy studies for dystrophic EB have identified fibroblasts expressing COL7A1 as a promising therapeutic strategy. We observed COL7A1 expression across several fibroblast subsets in prenatal skin and SkOs (Extended Data Fig. 6d), which lends support to the gene therapy approaches. The expression of genes implicated in congenital ichthyoses, a group of disorders resulting from abnormal epidermal differentiation, were primarily confined to keratinocytes (Extended Data Fig. 6f).

The prenatal skin and SkO datasets were integrated using Harmony (v.0.0.5) as described above. Differential expression analysis was performed between prenatal skin and SkO cells (all cell types) using the standard scanpy workflow (scanpy.tl.rank_genes_groups, method = “wilcoxon”). Identified DEGs were filtered to only retain those coding for secreted proteins (Supplementary Table 39). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed on downregulated and upregulated genes separately, using the implementation of the Enrichr workflow in the Python package GSEApy (https://gseapy.readthedocs.io/) with Gene Ontology Biological Process (2021) as the query database. Significant gene ontology terms (adjusted P value < 0.05) (Supplementary Tables 33 and 34) were filtered based on their relevance to vasculature. Only DEGs involved in pathways thereby selected were chosen and their role in prenatal skin angiogenesis checked in the literature.

The role of macrophages in promoting wound healing has been described in postnatal mouse skin and in adult human skin. In prenatal skin, macrophage subsets (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f) were predicted to co-locate with fibroblasts, neural cells and vascular cells in distinct tissue microenvironments in early gestation (Fig. 1d). Specifically, LYVE1+ macrophages co-located with WNT2+ fibroblasts (Fig. 3c–e) and were predicted to interact through platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and corresponding receptors (PDGFRα and PDGFRβ) expressed on fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8). Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart. Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1–IGF1R and GRN–EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1+ macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts.

We recently identified yolk-sac derived TREM2+ macrophages that share an expression profile (P2RY12, CX3CR1 and OLFML3) with microglia-like macrophages from other developing organs, such as the brain, prenatal skin and gonads, (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f). Prenatal skin TREM2+ microglia-like (TML) macrophages were highly correlated with embryonic brain microglia (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b) and co-expressed immunomodulatory genes, including immune-inhibitory receptors (for example, CX3CR1) and regulators of IL-6 production (for example, SYT11) (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 19–23). Downregulation of inflammation and IL-6 confers anti-fibrogenic properties in mouse skin transplants and in fetal wounds,. TML macrophages were predicted to co-locate with WNT2+ fibroblasts in early prenatal skin (6–8 PCW) (Fig. 3c,d) and WNT2+ fibroblasts had downregulated IL6 expression compared with adult fibroblasts (Fig. 3a).