Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation 1 . Within the dermal compartment, we observed HF-specialized fibroblasts, the dermal condensate (Dc) and dermal papilla (Dp), from 12 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c). 

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs 20 (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (T reg ) cells 21 , and in control of autoimmunity (CD24) 22 . This result highlighted the potential role of T reg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). T reg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin 23,24 . , adult healthy skin 10 and hair-bearing SkO 1 were integrated for comparison. Spatial experiments were carried out using RNAscope, immunofluorescence and Visium analyses. Findings of the study were functionally validated using a SkO co-culture. b, Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization of the prenatal skin dataset with broad annotation of cell states, as denoted by colour and number in the legend. c, Milo beeswarm plot showing the differential abundance of neighbourhoods in prenatal skin across gestation time, annotated by broad cell labels. Red and blue neighbourhoods are significantly enriched in earlier or later gestation, respectively. Colour intensity denotes degree of significance. d, Dotplot showing spatial microenvironments (MEs). Cell type to microenvironment coefficients are normalized by cell type sums, and cell type to microenvironment assignment is shown by colour. ME5, which shows co-locating macrophages and endothelial cells, is highlighted (grey).

A prenatal skin atlas reveals immune regulation of human skin morphogenesis

To characterize the role of distinct lineages and cell states during human prenatal skin development, we obtained single-cell suspensions of skin from 7 to 17 PCW, spanning the first and second trimesters (Fig. 1a). We performed fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to isolate live, single immune (CD45 + ) and non-immune (CD45 -) populations and to enhance keratinocyte and endothelial cell capture before scRNA-seq profiling (Extended Data Fig. 1a and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Single-cell αβ T cell receptor (TCR) sequencing data were generated to accurately resolve T cell subsets. Spatial validation was carried out using multiplex RNA in situ hybridization (RNAscope), newly generated spatial transcriptomics (Visium) data from embryonic facial and abdominal skin, and published Visium data from embryonic limb from which only skin areas were analysed 12 (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 2). In addition, we integrated new and published single-cell datasets of adult skin 10 and of a hair-bearing SkO model derived from human embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells 1 for comparative analysis (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 2). We also compared in vivo prenatal and organoid HFs with scRNA-seq data of adult HFs 11 . Our data can be interactively explored through our WebAtlas-based 13 portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-skin). The analysis software for this study is archived at Zenodo (https://doi. org/10.5281/zenodo.8164271) 14 . 

Our prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset comprised 534,581 cells, of which 433,961 cells passed quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1b). Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3).

A combination of fibroblast and macrophage-associated molecular features potentially contribute to the ability of prenatal skin to heal without scarring, including the presence of fibroblast progenitors, a downregulated immune milieu and reduced collagen expression. However, we found progressive 'ageing' and acquisition of the adult 'pro-inflammatory' phenotype as early as 9 PCW, which could be targeted in fibroblasts to guide postnatal scarless healing. Future studies that align human fibroblast subsets across the lifespan are required to investigate the dynamics of scarless healing and the roles of mechanical forces, microbiota and environmental exposure on fibroblast functions. 

Our prenatal human skin atlas represents a valuable resource to explore genes that cause congenital hair and skin disorders and is freely accessible from our web portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/ fetal-skin). We found that implicated genes are indeed expressed during prenatal skin development and HF differentiation, thereby supporting an in utero origin for these disorders. Our systematic prenatal skin-SkO comparison provides a blueprint to guide more faithful in vitro SkO generation, which can facilitate future studies of interactions with the microbiota, the pathogenesis of congenital skin disorders, and hair and skin engineering for therapeutic applications, including hair regeneration and skin transplant.

Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). NMF can predict significant cellular co-locations that are not readily evident in conventional histopathology analyses 5,15 . Our analysis predicted distinct microenvironments in prenatal skin comprising epidermal, dermal, vascular and neural cells, each including specific types of immune cells (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in 'early and late neurovascular microenvironments' (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation. 

We next integrated and compared human prenatal and adult skin data 10 with the SkO model 1 . The aim was to determine the extent to which the SkO model recapitulates human skin differentiation at a molecular level and its potential utility to functionally assess the role of immune cells in skin morphogenesis (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a,b). Broadly, cell states were conserved among SkO, prenatal and adult skin, but SkO cell states matched prenatal skin more closely than adult skin across culture duration (Extended Data Fig. 2c,d and Supplementary Table 5). However, the tempo of differentiation varied across the distinct skin cell lineages. Even after 19 weeks of culture, fibroblasts, mural and Schwann cells had a low probability of correspondence to adult skin cell states (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5).