In this study, we characterized the dynamic composition of human prenatal skin during the early stages of de novo HF formation and highlighted the crucial skin immune and non-immune crosstalk that contributes to skin morphogenesis, results that are in line with emerging evidence in animal and human studies,. Our atlas indicated that macrophages contribute to scarless skin repair, fibroblast homeostasis and neurovascular development. This is in part contributed to by yolk-sac derived TML macrophages, which suggests that these cells have broader functions outside the central nervous system in early gestation. The presence of TML macrophages has previously been identified in several prenatal organs,,.

Consistent with this finding, multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining showed LYVE1+ and TML macrophages in close proximity to endothelial cells (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Video 1). Predicted ligand–receptor interactions were consistent with reciprocal communication between macrophages and endothelial cells to support angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell migration (for example, CXCL8–ACKR1 and CCL8–ACKR1), (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 28).

This led us to infer a potential contribution of macrophages in scarless healing in prenatal skin. Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1+ macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2+ fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair,.

We recently identified yolk-sac derived TREM2+ macrophages that share an expression profile (P2RY12, CX3CR1 and OLFML3) with microglia-like macrophages from other developing organs, such as the brain, prenatal skin and gonads, (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f). Prenatal skin TREM2+ microglia-like (TML) macrophages were highly correlated with embryonic brain microglia (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b) and co-expressed immunomodulatory genes, including immune-inhibitory receptors (for example, CX3CR1) and regulators of IL-6 production (for example, SYT11) (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 19–23). Downregulation of inflammation and IL-6 confers anti-fibrogenic properties in mouse skin transplants and in fetal wounds,. TML macrophages were predicted to co-locate with WNT2+ fibroblasts in early prenatal skin (6–8 PCW) (Fig. 3c,d) and WNT2+ fibroblasts had downregulated IL6 expression compared with adult fibroblasts (Fig. 3a).

We next introduced autologous iPS cell-derived macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 11h) in the early stages of SkO differentiation and assessed the endothelial network on day 35 of co-culture. Macrophages co-localized with blood vessels even after 5 weeks of culture (Fig. 4f–h). A more elaborate and organized vascular network was seen in SkOs co-cultured with macrophages compared with control SkOs without macrophages (Fig. 4f,g). Control SkOs displayed a mesh-like aggregation of endothelial cells, quantified as a higher density of endothelial cell coverage of SkO volume, which was absent in SkOs co-cultured with macrophages (Fig. 4f,g). This disorganized vascular mesh may have prevented the isolation of endothelial cells for scRNA-seq analysis (Fig. 4b).

Macrophages have been implicated in angiogenesis during prenatal organ development and in the postnatal setting such as cancer-related angiogenesis,. Furthermore, macrophages expressing pro-angiogenic genes have been observed in diverse tissues during human development. Visium deconvolution analysis predicted co-location of prenatal skin macrophages with endothelial cells (‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’, ME1 and ME5) (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e). Gene ontology analysis showed that the four macrophage subsets (LYVE1+, MHCII+, TML and iron-recycling) expressed gene programs that drive angiogenesis (Supplementary Tables 23–26). Gene module expression profiles suggested that sprouting angiogenesis (growth of new vessels) was promoted by LYVE1+ and TML macrophages, blood vessel morphogenesis by LYVE1+ macrophages and endothelial cell chemotaxis by iron-recycling macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 8i and Supplementary Table 27).

TML macrophages were also predicted to co-locate with Schwann cells in prenatal skin (‘early neurovascular microenvironment’, ME1) (Figs. 1d and 3g) and expressed genes related to cell migration and neural development (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 22 and 23), which mirrored the functions of brain microglia and peripheral nerve-associated macrophages in mouse skin. TML macrophages were predicted to interact with Schwann cells, contributing to synapse formation and axon guidance (VEGFA–NRP1, VEGFA–NRP2, SEMA3C–NRP2 and SEMA3E–PLXND1) (Extended Data Fig. 8h and Supplementary Table 8). These findings suggest that prenatal skin macrophages may support the establishment of the skin peripheral nervous system during early gestation, as previously reported in mouse skin.

Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in ‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’ (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation.

We also observed a visibly more refined network and a trend towards reduced endothelial density in a two-dimensional angiogenesis assay of iPS cell-derived endothelial cells cultured with and without macrophages over 72 h (Extended Data Fig. 11i). Collectively, our findings demonstrate that interactions between macrophages and endothelial cells are required to support angiogenesis through blood vessel remodelling.

The assay was imaged 2 h after initial culture and then every 24 h for 3 days using an EVOS 7000 microscope, and images were analysed using Fiji distribution of the ImageJ software (v.2.14.0). Before co-culture, iPS cell-derived macrophages were phenotyped using flow cytometry (Extended Data Fig. 11h). Macrophages were collected using TrypLE (Gibco) at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 5 min, and cells were collected by centrifugation (300g for 6 min). Cells were washed once with cell staining buffer (BioLegend) before cell counting and antibody staining. Nonspecific bindings were blocked using Human TruStain FcX (Fc receptor blocking solution, BioLegend) for 10 min on ice and then stained using a Fixable Blue Dead Cell Stain kit for 10 min on ice (1:500 in PBS, ThermoFisher). Cells were washed twice with cell staining buffer.

Using a scratch assay of SkO-derived fibroblasts cultured with or without iPS cell-derived macrophages, we demonstrated that scratch wound width closure was improved when fibroblasts were co-cultured with macrophages over 72 h (Extended Data Fig. 8g).

The role of macrophages in promoting wound healing has been described in postnatal mouse skin and in adult human skin. In prenatal skin, macrophage subsets (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f) were predicted to co-locate with fibroblasts, neural cells and vascular cells in distinct tissue microenvironments in early gestation (Fig. 1d). Specifically, LYVE1+ macrophages co-located with WNT2+ fibroblasts (Fig. 3c–e) and were predicted to interact through platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and corresponding receptors (PDGFRα and PDGFRβ) expressed on fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8). Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart. Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1–IGF1R and GRN–EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1+ macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts.