ME5, which shows co-locating macrophages and endothelial cells, is highlighted (grey). e, UMAP visualizations of the integrated prenatal skin, adult skin 10 and SkO 1 datasets, coloured by broad cell lineages. ASDC, Axl + Siglec6 + dendritic cells; DC, dendritic cells; HSC, haematopoietic stem cells; LC, Langerhans cells; LE, lymphatic endothelium; LTi, lymphoid tissue inducer cell; MEMP, megakaryocyte-erythroidmast cell progenitor; NK cell, natural killer cells; pDC, plasmacytoid dendritic cells. The images in a were created using BioRender (https://biorender.com). Inferred trajectory and pseudotime analysis of epidermal cells in the integrated prenatal skin and SkO data predicted the differentiation of POSTN + basal cells into two paths: ORS/CL trajectory, comprising DPYSL2 + basal cells, ORS and CL; and IRS trajectory, involving placode, matrix, cuticle/cortex and IRS (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 7). Along the ORS/CL trajectory, we identified new genes upregulated by DPYSL2 + basal cells, such as AGR2, and previously reported genes related to ORS differentiation (BARX2 and SOX9) 25,26 (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). AGR2 was downregulated along the IRS trajectory, whereas known matrix markers such as SHH and WNT10B 25,26 were upregulated (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). Loss of AGR2, which functions in the assembly of cysteine-rich receptors enriched in HFs, promotes cell migration 27 . Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN + basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2 + basal, POSTN + basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g). The same analysis was performed to obtain the top 10 interactions in SkO HFs (Extended Data Fig. 5c), defining early/late to match corresponding cell states as in prenatal skin. The top 10 interactions identified in prenatal skin HFs were also plotted within the SkO data to highlight similarities and differences between the two (Fig. 2g). 

Comparison with adult fibroblasts. Integrated scRNA-seq data from prenatal skin and adult healthy skin (with original annotations) 10 was subsetted to the cell group of interest (fibroblasts). DEGs between the adult and prenatal skin fibroblasts were derived using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test implementation in scanpy and adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (scanpy.tl.rank_genes_ groups, method = "wilcoxon", corr_method = "benjamini-hochberg"). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the top 1,000 genes in each group ranked by scores (Supplementary Table 13) and the implementation of the Enrichr workflow 102 in the Python package GSEApy (https://gseapy.readthedocs.io/; v.0.10.7) with Gene Ontology Biological Process (2021) as the query database (Supplementary Tables 14, 15). A selected list of genes was plotted to highlight differences between prenatal and adult skin fibroblasts. 

Gene set enrichment analysis.

Having mapped the differentiation of prenatal skin HFs, we leveraged this information to assess the extent to which genetic hair diseases have their roots in utero. Genes harbouring mutations known to cause reduced hair growth (hypotrichosis) or abnormally shaped hair (for example, pili torti) (Supplementary Table 12) were expressed along the ORS/CL trajectory, IRS trajectory and hair fibroblast trajectory pseudotimes (Extended Data Figs. 4f and 6a,b) and in prenatal HF cell Article states (Extended Data Fig. 6c). This finding suggested that these disorders result from dysfunctional HF development. 

Genes causing epidermolysis bullosa (EB), an inherited blistering skin disorder characterized by skin fragility secondary to structural defects in the epidermis and adjacent dermoepidermal junction 45 , were highly expressed in prenatal epidermal cells and at the dermoepidermal junction (Extended Data Fig. 6d,e). Gene therapy studies for dystrophic EB have identified fibroblasts expressing COL7A1 as a promising therapeutic strategy 46 . We observed COL7A1 expression across several fibroblast subsets in prenatal skin and SkOs (Extended Data Fig. 6d), which lends support to the gene therapy approaches. The expression of genes implicated in congenital ichthyoses, a group of disorders resulting from abnormal epidermal differentiation 47 , were primarily confined to keratinocytes (Extended Data Fig. 6f). 

Notably, we observed similar gene expression patterns across prenatal skin and SkO for the above described genetic hair and skin disorders (Extended Data Fig. 6c,d,f), which supported the value of the SkO as a model to study congenital diseases. Although we found that expression of genes implicated in these disorders are confined to structural cells, disease manifestations are often associated with immune infiltration, which implicates skin-immune crosstalk during pathogenesis 48,49 .

We used Dynamic Programming-based alignment to evaluate agreement between the single-cell trajectories of prenatal skin and SkO fibroblasts, which describe the in vivo and in vitro differentiation lineages from HOXC5 + early fibroblasts to the Dp. Genes2Genes (G2G) 39 is a Bayesian Information-theoretic Dynamic Programming framework that consistently captures matches and mismatches between two trajectories at both the gene level and the cell level. G2G outputs an optimal trajectory alignment that describes a nonlinear mapping of in vivo and in vitro pseudotime points in sequential order. This is based on the cost of matching or mismatching the gene expression distributions of each pair of organoid-reference time points, computed as a statistic of entropy difference between the two hypotheses under the minimum message length 97 criterion. This statistic is a Shannon information distance, calculated in the unit of information, nits. Given any gene set, G2G runs Dynamic Programming alignment for each gene, outputting a five-state alignment string over matches (one-to-one/one-to-many/many-to-one) and mismatches (insertions and deletions-gaps) between the in vivo and in vitro pseudotime points in sequential order, which is analogous to a DNA/protein alignment output. It then computes an alignment similarity measure (that is, the percentage of matches across the alignment string) for each gene (Supplementary Table 9). These alignment strings enabled us to identify different clusters of genes with different alignment patterns. G2G also generates an aggregated cell-level alignment across all gene-level alignments, resulting in an overall alignment similarity measure as well. This aggregated alignment reflects whether the time points are matched or mismatched across genes on average (that is, if there is a higher proportion of gene-level alignments at which a specific time point pair between the two trajectories is matched, then the average alignment includes them as a match). 

Using G2G, we examined the in vivo reference versus in vitro query alignment in terms of 1,369 human TFs 98 . These TFs were taken after filtering zero expressed genes and genes expressed in fewer than ten cells.

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA + FOXD1 + SOX2 low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1 + SOX2 + ), which abuts the epithelial hair placode 26,28 . Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin 28,29 . Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP + , SOX2 + ) 26,28 (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h). 

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB + fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5 + early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2 + fibroblasts and PEAR1 + fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7). Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell-cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration [30][31][32] (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells 33,34 . 

We explored the mesenchymal-epithelial interactions that instruct early HF formation. Receptor-ligand analysis predicted interactions between CXCL12 expressed by pre-Dc cells (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h) with ACKR3 on epidermal basal cells (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Table 8). RNAscope analysis confirmed that these two genes co-located (Fig. 2h). This result suggests that CXCL12 probably interacts with ACKR3 to mediate the migration of pre-Dc cells 31,35 . Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand-receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12-CXCR4 and CXCL12-DPP4) 35,36  The Dc, for which formation is accompanied by invagination of the placode, expressed FAM3C and EFNB1, which were, respectively, predicted to interact with LAMP1 or CXADR and EPHB6 on the placode, and have been reported to promote cell migration and invasion 37,38 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8).

In this study, we characterized the dynamic composition of human prenatal skin during the early stages of de novo HF formation and highlighted the crucial skin immune and non-immune crosstalk that contributes to skin morphogenesis, results that are in line with emerging evidence in animal and human studies 69,75 . Our atlas indicated that macrophages contribute to scarless skin repair, fibroblast homeostasis and neurovascular development. This is in part contributed to by yolk-sac derived TML macrophages, which suggests that these cells have broader functions outside the central nervous system in early gestation. The presence of TML macrophages has previously been identified in several prenatal organs 5,58,69 . 

Successful co-culture with immune cells has been demonstrated in some organoid systems 76,77 . We identified a crucial role of macrophages in vascular network remodelling after adding macrophages to hair-bearing iPS cell-derived SkOs. Not only is this important for our understanding of the diverse cellular interactions that mediate morphogenesis but it also has practical implications for in vitro models, which commonly fail to vascularize 78 . Our study provides further insights into human HF formation and the origin of the CL, which seems to develop along the same trajectory as the ORS. These findings are consistent with recent results from mouse studies 26,79 , which showed that CL development occurs before hair matrix formation 79 and there is greater transcriptional similarity of CL cells to ORS cells 25 . Although we note similarities between human and mouse in the signalling pathways co-ordinating HF formation, our study reveals key cross-species distinctions in the differentiation tempo of HF mesenchymal cells. Future studies are required to fully delineate the features that distinguish human skin development.

Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand-receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12-CXCR4 and CXCL12-DPP4) 35,36  The Dc, for which formation is accompanied by invagination of the placode, expressed FAM3C and EFNB1, which were, respectively, predicted to interact with LAMP1 or CXADR and EPHB6 on the placode, and have been reported to promote cell migration and invasion 37,38 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8). Finally, RSPO3 from the Dp was predicted to interact with LGR4 and LGR6 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8) in overlying matrix cells to contribute to the proliferation of HF epithelial cells 33 . Notably, the highlighted interactions were conserved between the mesenchymal and epithelial cells of the SkO model for corresponding stages during HF formation (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 8). These results provide orthogonal validation of our findings and reinforce the utility of the SkO as an accurate model of prenatal skin development. 

We further evaluated the differentiation trajectory alignment between prenatal skin and the SkO model using the Genes2Genes analysis framework 39 to compare the expression of transcription factors (TFs) along the hair fibroblast trajectory. Overall, we observed a high number of matching TFs across pseudotime, which indicated that there are similar activated gene regulatory programs between prenatal skin and SkO during HF fibroblast differentiation (Fig. 2i and Supplementary Table 9). TFs that were mismatched across pseudotime or drove misalignment in early and late pseudotime (for example, HOXA7 and BARX1) were largely attributable to the different origins of dermal cells between prenatal skin (trunk and limb) and SkO (neural crest differentiation) 40 (Extended Data Fig. 5d,e and Supplementary Table 9).

The tool was run 10 times, with a dataset comprising at most 1,000 cells per cell type × tissue pair (where tissue is prenatal skin or SkO). For each run, an adjacency matrix of TFs and their targets was generated and pruned using the Aert's group suggested parameters. Only regulons present in at least 6 out of 10 runs were used in the analysis. PySCENIC was used to calculate the regulon specificity score for each cell type × tissue pair using the aucell function. An average was computed over the multiple runs. These average scores were used to compare regulon activity between prenatal skin and SkO. A gene interaction network was first built by querying the STRING database with GATA2 target genes, then pruned to only keep genes reported as associated with GATA2. The list was further truncated to 12 genes, by keeping genes that met the following criteria: (1) TFs in the five most active regulons detected in fetal skin; and/or (2) organoid capillary arterioles; and/or (3) associated with pseudotime (that is, in trajectories); and/or (4) VEGF receptors; and/or (5) in the selected gene ontology terms chosen for their role in angiogenesis, extracellular matrix organization, or cell migration, communication, proliferation, or death (GO:0045765, GO:0001568, GO:0030334, GO:0010646, GO:0001936, GO:0045446, GO:0002040, GO:0030155, GO:0010941 and GO:0030198). 

Comparison of pro-angiogenic and anti-angiogenic genes between prenatal skin and SkO. The prenatal skin and SkO datasets were integrated using Harmony (v.0.0.5) 91 as described above. Differential expression analysis was performed between prenatal skin and SkO cells (all cell types) using the standard scanpy workflow (scanpy. tl.rank_genes_groups, method = "wilcoxon").

The precise mechanisms of de novo HF formation in human embryonic development are largely inferred from mouse studies 16 . Human studies have primarily focused on morphological descriptions during development 17 or cycling HFs in adult skin 18 . Our single-cell dataset captured the onset of HF formation, which enabled direct comparison between prenatal developing HFs and adult cycling HFs. 

Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14-15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a). 

Consistent with our histological observations, we identified HF cells from 14 PCW in our scRNA-seq data, which comprised placode, matrix (SHH + ), outer root sheath (ORS) (SLC26A7 + ), companion layer (CL), inner root sheath (IRS) and cuticle and cortex cells (cuticle/cortex; part of the inner layers of the HF) (Fig. 2a-c, Extended Data Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Table 6). In addition, we observed immature and mature interfollicular epidermal (IFE) cells. Immature IFE cells, including periderm, immature basal and immature suprabasal cells, were present from 7 PCW and decreased after 11 PCW, during the transition from embryonic to fetal skin (Fig. 2b). Mature basal (DPYSL2 + ) and suprabasal IFE cells increased after 11 PCW, whereas POSTN + basal cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3b). Sebaceous and apocrine gland cells, which mature after 16 PCW 19 , were not captured at these stages. Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation 1 .

The full list of DEGs for each cluster is provided in Supplementary Table 3. DEGs were calculated using the sctk (Single Cell analysis Tool kit) package (https://github.com/Teichlab/sctk), where filtering is carried out followed by a two-sided Wilcoxon rank-sum test using pass-filter genes only in a one-versus-all fashion. The sctk package also carries out comparisons between the group of interest (one with highest expression) and the next group (second highly expressed), where the maximum proportion of cells expressing the gene in question in the second most highly expressed group was 0.2. For epidermal annotations, we created a combined embedding of prenatal skin and SkO data 1 , integrated using the Harmony pipeline, as well as integration with adult HF to check annotations, as described below. Harmony-corrected principal components were used to compute the batch-corrected nearest neighbourhood graph, and the Leiden algorithm was used to cluster the integrated data. The sctk package was then used to derive DEGs for each Leiden cluster. Annotation was carried out on the clusters based on marker genes and refined annotations in the SkO data 1 . 

Clusters of doublets were manually flagged and removed, taking into account markers genes and previously calculated scrublet scores. To have a final global visualization of the atlas, a doublet-free UMAP was generated (Fig. 1b). 

Processing, clustering and annotation of SkO dataset. Organoid data were pre-processed, filtered, clustered and annotated separately before integration with prenatal skin. In brief, cells filtered by CellRanger (CellRanger 2.1.0 with GRCh38-1.2.0 and CellRanger 3.0.2 with GRCh38-3.0.0) from SkO samples (2 strains, each with 4 time points) were pooled and quality control thresholds for UMI counts, gene counts, percentage of mitochondrial genes and top 50 highly expressed genes were established by fitting Gaussian mixture models to the distribution of each metric respectively.

The subsampled dataset were analysed separately using the permutation-based method to establish significance (P value cut-off = 0.05). For the analysis by early/late gestation, the prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset was first split into early (≤11 PCW) and late (≥12 PCW) gestation datasets, which were then subsampled (no more than 200 cells per cell type) and individually analysed (P value cut-off = 0.05). A summary output file was created for each analysis run, compiling the interactions for each cell pair (P < 0.05) and adjusting P values for multiple testing (FDR set at 0.05) (Supplementary Tables 8  and 28). Circos plots (Circlize package (v.0.4.15) 101 ) were used for downstream visualizations of selected significant (adjusted P value < 0.05) interactions between co-locating cell types for interactions found in all subsampled analyses. 

To explore inferred interactions between macrophage subsets and endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 9a), we aggregated the interactions predicted for each macrophage subset and the different subtypes of endothelial cells (early endothelial cells, arterioles, capillary arterioles, capillaries, postcapillary venules and venules) by averaging the means and using the minimum of the adjusted P values as previously described 5 . A curated list of aggregated interactions were plotted for visualization using ggplot2 (v. 3.3.6). A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2 + basal, POSTN + basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g).

tl.rank_genes_groups, method = "wilcoxon"). Identified DEGs were filtered to only retain those coding for secreted proteins 107 (Supplementary Table 39). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed on downregulated and upregulated genes separately, using the implementation of the Enrichr workflow 102 in the Python package GSEApy (https://gseapy.readthedocs.io/) with Gene Ontology Biological Process (2021) as the query database. Significant gene ontology terms (adjusted P value < 0.05) (Supplementary Tables 33 and 34) were filtered based on their relevance to vasculature. Only DEGs involved in pathways thereby selected were chosen and their role in prenatal skin angiogenesis checked in the literature. 

NicheNet analysis. We used NicheNet 74 (v.1.1.1) to infer ligand-target gene links by combining scRNA-seq data (prenatal skin and SkO) of interacting cells (sender and receiver cells) with existing knowledge on signalling and gene regulatory networks. An open-source R implementation including integrated data sources used in the analysis are available at GitHub (https://github.com/saeyslab/nichenetr). NicheNet's ligand-activity analysis first assesses and ranks ligands in the sender cell type (macrophage subsets), which best predict observed changes in expression of target genes of interest in the receiver cell types (endothelial cells) compared with background genes. Potential ligands were defined as all ligands in the NicheNet model that were expressed in at least 10% of cells in each macrophage (sender) cluster and had at least one specific receptor expressed in at least 10% of endothelial (receiver) cells. Target genes of interest were identified as DEGs between conditions (prenatal skin versus SkO) in receiver cells using FindMarkers function in NicheNet (adjusted P value ≤ 0.05 and average log 2 (fold change) > 0.25, expressed in at least 10% of endothelial cells). Background genes were all genes in the NicheNet model that were expressed in at least 10% of receiver cells.

Gene set enrichment analysis. To determine the significantly overexpressed genes for gene set enrichment analysis, we first identified the DEGs between cell types for each cell group of interest (myeloid cells) using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test implementation in Scanpy (scanpy. tl.rank_genes_groups, method = "wilcoxon"). Genes with differential expression log(fold change) > 1.5 and adjusted P value < 0.01 were considered as significantly overexpressed (Supplementary Table 22). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the implementation of the Enrichr workflow 102 in the Python package GSEApy (https://gseapy. readthedocs.io/; v.0.10.7) with Gene Ontology Biological Process (2023) and Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) Hallmark (2020) as query databases (Supplementary Tables 23-26). 

For comparison between early and late cell states, for cell types of interest (WNT2 + fibroblast), we first identified the index cells belonging to early neighbourhoods (SpatialFDR < 0.1, log(fold change) < 0) and late neighbourhoods (SpatialFDR < 0.1, log(fold change) > 0) based on Milo 95 differential abundance testing as described above (Supplementary Table 4). DEGs between early and late cell states were computed using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test implementation in scanpy (scanpy.tl. rank_genes_groups, method = "wilcoxon"). Genes with differential expression log(fold change) > 1 and adjusted P value < 0.01 were considered as significantly overexpressed (Supplementary Table 16) for gene set enrichment analysis using GSEApy (https://gseapy.readthedocs.io/; v.0.10.7), with Gene Ontology Biological Process (2023) as query the database (Supplementary Tables 17 and 18). Gene module scoring. Gene module scoring was performed using the sc.tl.score_genes function in scanpy.

To compare gene expression of FRZB in fibroblasts across developing organs, a scRNAseq stromal dataset from multiple developing organs 5 (available from the Human Developmental Cell Atlas (https://developmental.cellatlas. io/fetal-immune)) was used, which also includes our prenatal skin scRNA-seq data. The data were normalized to 1 × 10 4 counts per cell (scanpy.pp.normalize_total), log1p transformed (scanpy.pp.log1p) and subsetted to fibroblast cell types only to plot expression of FRZB by organ across gestation time. 

Trajectory analysis. The CellRank package 96 (v.1.5.2) was used to define cell transition matrices, lineage drivers and rank fate probabilities of terminal state transitions across annotated lineages in a combined embedding of prenatal skin and SkO for keratinocytes and fibroblasts and in the prenatal skin for endothelial cells. Using pp.moments (n_pcs=10, n_neighbours=30) from the scVelo package (v.0.3.0), first order kinetics matrices were imputed. Using the palantir kernel and the velocity kernel in CellRank 96 , a mixed probability transition matrix was computed with the palantir kernel weighing 70% and the velocity kernel 30%. Schur matrix Eigen decomposition (n_components=25, method='brandts') identified macrostates, terminal stages and initial stages. Lineage drivers were then computed for each state using compute_lineage_drivers from CellRank and pseudotime and latent time computed in scVelo (Supplementary Table 7). 

In vivo-in vitro trajectory alignment analysis. We used Dynamic Programming-based alignment to evaluate agreement between the single-cell trajectories of prenatal skin and SkO fibroblasts, which describe the in vivo and in vitro differentiation lineages from HOXC5 + early fibroblasts to the Dp.

with GRCh38-3.0.0) from SkO samples (2 strains, each with 4 time points) were pooled and quality control thresholds for UMI counts, gene counts, percentage of mitochondrial genes and top 50 highly expressed genes were established by fitting Gaussian mixture models to the distribution of each metric respectively. The following thresholds were used: minimum number of genes = 450, maximum number of genes = 5,731, minimum number of UMIs = 1,063, maximum number of UMIs = 25,559, maximum mitochondrial UMI fraction = 0.133, minimum cumulative percentage of counts for 50 most expressed genes in a cell = 23.7%, maximum cumulative percentage of counts for 50 most expressed genes in a cell = 56.6%. Highly variable gene selection, dimensionality reduction and KNN graph construction were done using the same method and parameters as prenatal skin. BBKNN (v.1.3.390) 92 as used for batch-correction treating combinations of strains and 10x kit versions as batches. Broad lineages were annotated based on known markers. Each broad lineage was then re-processed in the same way as prenatal skin to annotate cell types at higher resolution. 

Integration of prenatal skin and SkO datasets. Prenatal skin cells and organoid cells were integrated using Harmony (v.0.0.5) 91 , treating datasets as batches (prenatal skin or organoid) and within dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal skin, strain for SkO, and 10x kit version for both datasets). Leiden clusters were annotated using known markers.

Alignment, quality control, clustering and annotation of prenatal skin dataset. The gene expression data were mapped using Cell-Ranger (v.2.1.1 and v.2.0.2) to an Ensembl 84-based GRCh38 reference (10x Genomics-distributed v.1.2.0). The Python package emptydrops (v.0.0.5) was used to detect cells in each sample. Potential doublets were flagged using Scrublet (v.0.2.1) 86 as previously described 87 . Low-quality cells were filtered out first by using a median + (X × MAD) score (where MAD is the median absolute deviation) of the median score for the mitochondrial UMI fraction (5 × MAD), maximum number of UMIs (8 × MAD), followed by strict cut-off values (minimum number of genes = 200, maximum number of UMIs = 50,000, maximum mitochondrial UMI fraction = 0.20). Possible maternal contamination (total of 118 cells) was identified using the souporcell pipeline (v.2.4.0) 88 as previously described 5,58 . In brief, samples were pooled on a per-donor basis and processed with souporcell. The common GRCh38 variants file (SNPs with ≥2% frequency from 1k genomes) from souporcell authors was used. The pipeline was run twice, with genotype clusters set to 1 and 2 to obtain models for no maternal contamination and possible maternal contamination. The better model was identified using Bayesian information criterion (BIC), calculated using the formula BIC = kn log(m) − 2l, where k is the number of genotype clusters set for each souporcell run, n denotes the number of loci used for genotype deconvolution, m is the cell count for a given donor, and l is the log likelihood obtained after running the pipeline with each k. The cells with the minor genotype were identified as possible maternal contaminants where identified. Data pre-processing was performed using scanpy (v.1.4.3) 89 .