We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA+FOXD1+SOX2low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1+SOX2+), which abuts the epithelial hair placode,. Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin,. Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP+, SOX2+), (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h).

Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation. Within the dermal compartment, we observed HF-specialized fibroblasts, the dermal condensate (Dc) and dermal papilla (Dp), from 12 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c).

Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell–cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration– (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells,.

Prenatal human skin is able to heal without scarring but loses this capacity after 24 PCW. Scars result from aggregation of collagen produced by dermal fibroblasts and failure of the overlying epidermis to completely regenerate. To identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms that may endow early prenatal skin with scarless healing properties, we investigated the temporal changes in composition and transcriptional profile of the dermal fibroblast subsets (Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7a). We first compared prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts with healthy adult skin fibroblasts. All adult fibroblast subsets expressed high levels of inflammatory cytokines and receptors (for example, IL6 and IL1RA) and genes involved in antigen presentation (for example, HLA-A), innate immune and inflammatory responses (for example, CD55 and PTGES) and cellular senescence (CDKN1A) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13–15).

We also assessed the expression profiles of genes previously reported in mouse HF formation. Similar signalling pathways were upregulated, including WNT and EDA for hair placode specification, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and noggin to inhibit hair formation in IFE cells, and PDGFA and TGFβ signalling for HF down growth (Extended Data Fig. 5f). Additionally, similar to fibroblast differentiation in mouse skin, pre-Dcs, the Dc and Dp and dermal fibroblasts in human prenatal skin also originated from a common fibroblast progenitor (HOXC5+ early fibroblast) (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 4d). However, cross-species data integration of human and mouse HF showed that human pre-Dc cells and the Dc aligned not only to their counterparts in mouse skin but also to fibroblasts in earlier stages of differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 5g–i and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11).

Our prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset comprised 534,581 cells, of which 433,961 cells passed quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1b). Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3). Differential abundance analysis testing revealed how different cell populations varied across gestation. Among ectoderm-derived cells, neural cells and the periderm, which constitutes the first skin permeability barrier, were enriched in early gestation, whereas suprabasal epidermal and HF cells were mainly observed in later gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Mesoderm-derived cells, including skin fibroblasts and endothelial cells, and immune cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4).

Target genes of interest were identified as DEGs between conditions (prenatal skin versus SkO) in receiver cells using FindMarkers function in NicheNet (adjusted P value ≤ 0.05 and average log2(fold change) > 0.25, expressed in at least 10% of endothelial cells). Background genes were all genes in the NicheNet model that were expressed in at least 10% of receiver cells.

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB+ fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5+ early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2+ fibroblasts and PEAR1+ fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in ‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’ (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation.

We explored the mesenchymal–epithelial interactions that instruct early HF formation. Receptor–ligand analysis predicted interactions between CXCL12 expressed by pre-Dc cells (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h) with ACKR3 on epidermal basal cells (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Table 8). RNAscope analysis confirmed that these two genes co-located (Fig. 2h). This result suggests that CXCL12 probably interacts with ACKR3 to mediate the migration of pre-Dc cells,. Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand–receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12–CXCR4 and CXCL12–DPP4), (Extended Data Figs. 1f and 5a and Supplementary Table 8), which suggested that innate immune cells may support pre-Dc cell migration during early HF development. Additional experiments are required to functionally validate these interactions in prenatal hair formation.

Human skin organogenesis begins after gastrulation from two primary germ layers. The epidermis, the most superficial layer of the skin, melanocytes and neural cells arise from the ectoderm. The dermis, which is separated from the epidermis by the basement membrane and contains endothelial and mural cells, derives from the mesoderm (apart from facial and cranial skin, where it arises from ectoderm-derived neural crest cells). The skin appendages, which include hair follicles (HFs) and sebaceous glands, form in a cephalocaudal direction. Prenatal HFs start forming between 11 and 14 post-conception weeks (PCW), initiated by interactions between epidermal placodes (focal sites of epidermal layer thickening) and dermal condensates (aggregates of dermal fibroblasts), whereas sebaceous glands develop from around 16 PCW.

Inferred trajectory and pseudotime analysis of epidermal cells in the integrated prenatal skin and SkO data predicted the differentiation of POSTN+ basal cells into two paths: ORS/CL trajectory, comprising DPYSL2+ basal cells, ORS and CL; and IRS trajectory, involving placode, matrix, cuticle/cortex and IRS (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 7). Along the ORS/CL trajectory, we identified new genes upregulated by DPYSL2+ basal cells, such as AGR2, and previously reported genes related to ORS differentiation (BARX2 and SOX9), (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). AGR2 was downregulated along the IRS trajectory, whereas known matrix markers such as SHH and WNT10B, were upregulated (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). Loss of AGR2, which functions in the assembly of cysteine-rich receptors enriched in HFs, promotes cell migration.

By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the SkO model recapitulated the different components of prenatal skin HF, interfollicular epidermis, neural cells and dermal fibroblasts, but immune cells were not represented and endothelial cells were markedly reduced.

Prenatal skin interfaces with the amniotic fluid in a sterile environment. However, immune cells such as macrophages seed the skin as early as 6 PCW and express a range of pro-inflammatory genes, although genes relating to antigen presentation (for example, major histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII)) are only upregulated after 11 PCW. Decoupling of the expression of pro-inflammatory genes from MHCII genes before 11 PCW suggests that antigen presentation may not be a key function of human macrophages during early gestation. Together with evidence of their role in tissue homeostasis, and healing in mouse models,, this raises the question of whether macrophages contribute to human early skin morphogenesis.

By contrast, prenatal skin fibroblasts had upregulated genes involved in immune suppression (CD200), regulation of inflammation (for example, RAMP2) and tissue regeneration (MDK) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13–15).

We further evaluated the differentiation trajectory alignment between prenatal skin and the SkO model using the Genes2Genes analysis framework to compare the expression of transcription factors (TFs) along the hair fibroblast trajectory. Overall, we observed a high number of matching TFs across pseudotime, which indicated that there are similar activated gene regulatory programs between prenatal skin and SkO during HF fibroblast differentiation (Fig. 2i and Supplementary Table 9). TFs that were mismatched across pseudotime or drove misalignment in early and late pseudotime (for example, HOXA7 and BARX1) were largely attributable to the different origins of dermal cells between prenatal skin (trunk and limb) and SkO (neural crest differentiation) (Extended Data Fig. 5d,e and Supplementary Table 9).

Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN+ basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

Notably, WNT2+ and PEAR1+ prenatal fibroblasts expressed several genes involved in cellular senescence (CDKN1A), cytokine pathways (for example, IL1R1) and collagen deposition (for example, POSTN) (Fig. 3a,b), which are highly expressed in pathogenic fibroblasts of fibrotic skin disorders. These results provide further support for our finding of progressive acquisition of scar-promoting genes in later gestation, consistent with the clinical observation of scarring in third trimester skin.

To locate cells identified from scRNA-seq data in situ, we performed Cell2location analysis of spatial transcriptomics data of facial and abdominal skin (10 PCW) and embryonic lower limb skin (6–8 PCW) (Supplementary Table 2). We assessed cell type co-location using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to computationally predict microenvironments in conjunction with correlation analyses. Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). NMF can predict significant cellular co-locations that are not readily evident in conventional histopathology analyses,. Our analysis predicted distinct microenvironments in prenatal skin comprising epidermal, dermal, vascular and neural cells, each including specific types of immune cells (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f).

A gene interaction network was first built by querying the STRING database with GATA2 target genes, then pruned to only keep genes reported as associated with GATA2. The list was further truncated to 12 genes, by keeping genes that met the following criteria: (1) TFs in the five most active regulons detected in fetal skin; and/or (2) organoid capillary arterioles; and/or (3) associated with pseudotime (that is, in trajectories); and/or (4) VEGF receptors; and/or (5) in the selected gene ontology terms chosen for their role in angiogenesis, extracellular matrix organization, or cell migration, communication, proliferation, or death (GO:0045765, GO:0001568, GO:0030334, GO:0010646, GO:0001936, GO:0045446, GO:0002040, GO:0030155, GO:0010941 and GO:0030198).

We used NicheNet (v.1.1.1) to infer ligand–target gene links by combining scRNA-seq data (prenatal skin and SkO) of interacting cells (sender and receiver cells) with existing knowledge on signalling and gene regulatory networks. An open-source R implementation including integrated data sources used in the analysis are available at GitHub (https://github.com/saeyslab/nichenetr). NicheNet’s ligand–activity analysis first assesses and ranks ligands in the sender cell type (macrophage subsets), which best predict observed changes in expression of target genes of interest in the receiver cell types (endothelial cells) compared with background genes. Potential ligands were defined as all ligands in the NicheNet model that were expressed in at least 10% of cells in each macrophage (sender) cluster and had at least one specific receptor expressed in at least 10% of endothelial (receiver) cells.

The sctk package also carries out comparisons between the group of interest (one with highest expression) and the next group (second highly expressed), where the maximum proportion of cells expressing the gene in question in the second most highly expressed group was 0.2. For epidermal annotations, we created a combined embedding of prenatal skin and SkO data, integrated using the Harmony pipeline, as well as integration with adult HF to check annotations, as described below. Harmony-corrected principal components were used to compute the batch-corrected nearest neighbourhood graph, and the Leiden algorithm was used to cluster the integrated data. The sctk package was then used to derive DEGs for each Leiden cluster. Annotation was carried out on the clusters based on marker genes and refined annotations in the SkO data.

Our prenatal human skin atlas represents a valuable resource to explore genes that cause congenital hair and skin disorders and is freely accessible from our web portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-skin). We found that implicated genes are indeed expressed during prenatal skin development and HF differentiation, thereby supporting an in utero origin for these disorders. Our systematic prenatal skin–SkO comparison provides a blueprint to guide more faithful in vitro SkO generation, which can facilitate future studies of interactions with the microbiota, the pathogenesis of congenital skin disorders, and hair and skin engineering for therapeutic applications, including hair regeneration and skin transplant.

To explore inferred interactions between macrophage subsets and endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 9a), we aggregated the interactions predicted for each macrophage subset and the different subtypes of endothelial cells (early endothelial cells, arterioles, capillary arterioles, capillaries, postcapillary venules and venules) by averaging the means and using the minimum of the adjusted P values as previously described. A curated list of aggregated interactions were plotted for visualization using ggplot2 (v.3.3.6). A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2+ basal, POSTN+ basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g).

Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14–15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a).

Prenatal skin, adult skin and SkO cells were integrated using Harmony (v.0.0.5), treating datasets as batches and within-dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal and adult skin and strain for organoid, 10x kit version for all datasets). The principal component vectors of the downsampled Harmony-integrated object were then used to transform the gene expression matrix (NumPy (v.1.23.4) function ‘linalg.lstsq’, rcond = ‘warn’) of all cells in the non-downsampled pooled data and project for UMAP visualization (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a). The median transformed gene expression was used to compute the Euclidean distance between prenatal skin, adult skin and SkO for each broad cell cluster, using ‘spatial.distance_matrix’ function in SciPy (v.1.9.3), which was then plotted as a heatmap (Extended Data Fig. 2c).

The role of macrophages in promoting wound healing has been described in postnatal mouse skin and in adult human skin. In prenatal skin, macrophage subsets (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f) were predicted to co-locate with fibroblasts, neural cells and vascular cells in distinct tissue microenvironments in early gestation (Fig. 1d). Specifically, LYVE1+ macrophages co-located with WNT2+ fibroblasts (Fig. 3c–e) and were predicted to interact through platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and corresponding receptors (PDGFRα and PDGFRβ) expressed on fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8). Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart. Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1–IGF1R and GRN–EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1+ macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts.

Although we note similarities between human and mouse in the signalling pathways co-ordinating HF formation, our study reveals key cross-species distinctions in the differentiation tempo of HF mesenchymal cells. Future studies are required to fully delineate the features that distinguish human skin development.

This led us to infer a potential contribution of macrophages in scarless healing in prenatal skin. Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1+ macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2+ fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair,.

Genes causing epidermolysis bullosa (EB), an inherited blistering skin disorder characterized by skin fragility secondary to structural defects in the epidermis and adjacent dermoepidermal junction, were highly expressed in prenatal epidermal cells and at the dermoepidermal junction (Extended Data Fig. 6d,e). Gene therapy studies for dystrophic EB have identified fibroblasts expressing COL7A1 as a promising therapeutic strategy. We observed COL7A1 expression across several fibroblast subsets in prenatal skin and SkOs (Extended Data Fig. 6d), which lends support to the gene therapy approaches. The expression of genes implicated in congenital ichthyoses, a group of disorders resulting from abnormal epidermal differentiation, were primarily confined to keratinocytes (Extended Data Fig. 6f).

Using G2G, we examined the in vivo reference versus in vitro query alignment in terms of 1,369 human TFs. These TFs were taken after filtering zero expressed genes and genes expressed in fewer than ten cells. Given the reference and organoid log1p normalized gene expression matrices of cells and their pseudotime estimates computed using CellRank, G2G generated fully descriptive TF-level alignments, as well as an aggregated cell-level alignment across those TF-level alignments. Before alignment, the reference and organoid trajectories were discretized over the pseudotime axis in equal length intervals. Note that the number of discrete pseudotime points was determined as 15 based on the optimal binning structures predicted over their pseudotime estimates distributions using the OptBinning python package. Also note that at each alignment, these are the discrete time points that are getting matched or mismatched.

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (Treg) cells, and in control of autoimmunity (CD24). This result highlighted the potential role of Treg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). Treg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin,. RNAscope (FOXP3+) and immunofluorescence staining (FOXP3+) showed that Treg cells were primarily located within and around HFs compared to interfollicular skin as early as 15 PCW (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3g,h).

Macrophages have been implicated in angiogenesis during prenatal organ development and in the postnatal setting such as cancer-related angiogenesis,. Furthermore, macrophages expressing pro-angiogenic genes have been observed in diverse tissues during human development. Visium deconvolution analysis predicted co-location of prenatal skin macrophages with endothelial cells (‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’, ME1 and ME5) (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e). Gene ontology analysis showed that the four macrophage subsets (LYVE1+, MHCII+, TML and iron-recycling) expressed gene programs that drive angiogenesis (Supplementary Tables 23–26). Gene module expression profiles suggested that sprouting angiogenesis (growth of new vessels) was promoted by LYVE1+ and TML macrophages, blood vessel morphogenesis by LYVE1+ macrophages and endothelial cell chemotaxis by iron-recycling macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 8i and Supplementary Table 27).

The prenatal skin and SkO datasets were integrated using Harmony (v.0.0.5) as described above. Differential expression analysis was performed between prenatal skin and SkO cells (all cell types) using the standard scanpy workflow (scanpy.tl.rank_genes_groups, method = “wilcoxon”). Identified DEGs were filtered to only retain those coding for secreted proteins (Supplementary Table 39). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed on downregulated and upregulated genes separately, using the implementation of the Enrichr workflow in the Python package GSEApy (https://gseapy.readthedocs.io/) with Gene Ontology Biological Process (2021) as the query database. Significant gene ontology terms (adjusted P value < 0.05) (Supplementary Tables 33 and 34) were filtered based on their relevance to vasculature. Only DEGs involved in pathways thereby selected were chosen and their role in prenatal skin angiogenesis checked in the literature.

TML macrophages were also predicted to co-locate with Schwann cells in prenatal skin (‘early neurovascular microenvironment’, ME1) (Figs. 1d and 3g) and expressed genes related to cell migration and neural development (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 22 and 23), which mirrored the functions of brain microglia and peripheral nerve-associated macrophages in mouse skin. TML macrophages were predicted to interact with Schwann cells, contributing to synapse formation and axon guidance (VEGFA–NRP1, VEGFA–NRP2, SEMA3C–NRP2 and SEMA3E–PLXND1) (Extended Data Fig. 8h and Supplementary Table 8). These findings suggest that prenatal skin macrophages may support the establishment of the skin peripheral nervous system during early gestation, as previously reported in mouse skin.

Organoid data were pre-processed, filtered, clustered and annotated separately before integration with prenatal skin. In brief, cells filtered by CellRanger (CellRanger 2.1.0 with GRCh38-1.2.0 and CellRanger 3.0.2 with GRCh38-3.0.0) from SkO samples (2 strains, each with 4 time points) were pooled and quality control thresholds for UMI counts, gene counts, percentage of mitochondrial genes and top 50 highly expressed genes were established by fitting Gaussian mixture models to the distribution of each metric respectively. The following thresholds were used: minimum number of genes = 450, maximum number of genes = 5,731, minimum number of UMIs = 1,063, maximum number of UMIs = 25,559, maximum mitochondrial UMI fraction = 0.133, minimum cumulative percentage of counts for 50 most expressed genes in a cell = 23.7%, maximum cumulative percentage of counts for 50 most expressed genes in a cell = 56.6%.

The PySCENIC package (v.0.11.2) and pipeline were used to identify TFs and their target genes in the combined prenatal skin and SkO scRNA-seq datasets. The ranking database (hg38 refseq-r80 500bp_up_and_100bp_down_tss.mc9nr.feather), motif annotation database (motifs-v9-nr.hgnc-m0.001-o0.0.tbl) were downloaded from the Aert’s laboratory GitHub page. The tool was run 10 times, with a dataset comprising at most 1,000 cells per cell type × tissue pair (where tissue is prenatal skin or SkO). For each run, an adjacency matrix of TFs and their targets was generated and pruned using the Aert’s group suggested parameters. Only regulons present in at least 6 out of 10 runs were used in the analysis. PySCENIC was used to calculate the regulon specificity score for each cell type × tissue pair using the aucell function. An average was computed over the multiple runs. These average scores were used to compare regulon activity between prenatal skin and SkO.

Anti-angiogenic genes (for example, WNT5A) and corresponding receptors were highly expressed in SkO, whereas pro-angiogenic genes (for example, CXCL8) were upregulated in prenatal skin and primarily expressed by macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 11a and Supplementary Tables 30–34). Although expression of vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF), VEGFA and VEGFB were increased in SkO cells, their receptors (KDR and FLT1) on SkO capillary arterioles were downregulated compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11b,c). These receptors are known downstream targets of GATA2, which has a key role in angiogenesis during development and regulates VEGF-induced endothelial cell migration and sprouting in vitro. Regulon analysis showed that GATA2 and related regulons (for example, NFATC1) were downregulated in SkO capillary arterioles (Extended Data Fig. 11d,e).

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29). Inferred trajectory analysis showed that early endothelial cells in prenatal skin differentiated into either an arteriolar pathway (capillaries, capillary arterioles and arterioles) or venular pathway (postcapillary venules and venules), with expression of characteristic genes (for example, GJA5 for arteriolar and PLVAP for venular) (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a–c). Unlike SkO capillary arteriole cells, prenatal skin capillary arteriole cells could further differentiate into arterioles (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a).

The precise mechanisms of de novo HF formation in human embryonic development are largely inferred from mouse studies. Human studies have primarily focused on morphological descriptions during development or cycling HFs in adult skin. Our single-cell dataset captured the onset of HF formation, which enabled direct comparison between prenatal developing HFs and adult cycling HFs.

For comparison between early and late cell states, for cell types of interest (WNT2+ fibroblast), we first identified the index cells belonging to early neighbourhoods (SpatialFDR < 0.1, log(fold change) < 0) and late neighbourhoods (SpatialFDR < 0.1, log(fold change) > 0) based on Milo differential abundance testing as described above (Supplementary Table 4). DEGs between early and late cell states were computed using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test implementation in scanpy (scanpy.tl.rank_genes_groups, method = “wilcoxon”). Genes with differential expression log(fold change) > 1 and adjusted P value < 0.01 were considered as significantly overexpressed (Supplementary Table 16) for gene set enrichment analysis using GSEApy (https://gseapy.readthedocs.io/; v.0.10.7), with Gene Ontology Biological Process (2023) as query the database (Supplementary Tables 17 and 18).

Prenatal skin cells and organoid cells were integrated using Harmony (v.0.0.5), treating datasets as batches (prenatal skin or organoid) and within dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal skin, strain for SkO, and 10x kit version for both datasets). Leiden clusters were annotated using known markers.

To compare prenatal skin cells with external datasets (adult HF, embryonic macrophages, blood vessel organoid, reindeer skin),,,, the datasets were downsampled to have roughly balanced cell counts per annotated cell type before integration with Harmony (v.0.0.5), treating datasets as batches and within dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal skin, site for embryonic macrophages, group (cell line: day of culture) for blood vessel organoid, chemistry for reindeer skin).

Collectively, our findings suggest that prenatal skin fibroblasts in early gestation downregulate genes involved in extracellular matrix formation, collagen deposition and inflammation, which may favour tissue regeneration over scarring. Based on our data and previous studies, we also posit a potential role for early skin macrophages in conferring the distinct property of scarless healing in early prenatal skin. However, further studies are required to fully elucidate the interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts in human prenatal skin and to conclusively establish their role in scarless healing.

Innate immune cells, such as macrophages and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), were present from early gestation, whereas B cells and T cells emerged later, accompanying thymus, bone marrow and spleen formation from around 10 PCW (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Some subsets of macrophages, ILCs and fibroblasts exhibited distinct gene expression profiles between early and late gestation, which suggested that functional maturation or dual waves of production occur during development (Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 1d).