We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA+FOXD1+SOX2low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1+SOX2+), which abuts the epithelial hair placode,. Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin,. Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP+, SOX2+), (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h).

Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation. Within the dermal compartment, we observed HF-specialized fibroblasts, the dermal condensate (Dc) and dermal papilla (Dp), from 12 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c).

Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell–cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration– (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells,.

Prenatal human skin is able to heal without scarring but loses this capacity after 24 PCW. Scars result from aggregation of collagen produced by dermal fibroblasts and failure of the overlying epidermis to completely regenerate. To identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms that may endow early prenatal skin with scarless healing properties, we investigated the temporal changes in composition and transcriptional profile of the dermal fibroblast subsets (Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7a). We first compared prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts with healthy adult skin fibroblasts. All adult fibroblast subsets expressed high levels of inflammatory cytokines and receptors (for example, IL6 and IL1RA) and genes involved in antigen presentation (for example, HLA-A), innate immune and inflammatory responses (for example, CD55 and PTGES) and cellular senescence (CDKN1A) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13–15).

We also assessed the expression profiles of genes previously reported in mouse HF formation. Similar signalling pathways were upregulated, including WNT and EDA for hair placode specification, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and noggin to inhibit hair formation in IFE cells, and PDGFA and TGFβ signalling for HF down growth (Extended Data Fig. 5f). Additionally, similar to fibroblast differentiation in mouse skin, pre-Dcs, the Dc and Dp and dermal fibroblasts in human prenatal skin also originated from a common fibroblast progenitor (HOXC5+ early fibroblast) (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 4d). However, cross-species data integration of human and mouse HF showed that human pre-Dc cells and the Dc aligned not only to their counterparts in mouse skin but also to fibroblasts in earlier stages of differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 5g–i and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11).

Our prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset comprised 534,581 cells, of which 433,961 cells passed quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1b). Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3). Differential abundance analysis testing revealed how different cell populations varied across gestation. Among ectoderm-derived cells, neural cells and the periderm, which constitutes the first skin permeability barrier, were enriched in early gestation, whereas suprabasal epidermal and HF cells were mainly observed in later gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Mesoderm-derived cells, including skin fibroblasts and endothelial cells, and immune cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4).

Target genes of interest were identified as DEGs between conditions (prenatal skin versus SkO) in receiver cells using FindMarkers function in NicheNet (adjusted P value ≤ 0.05 and average log2(fold change) > 0.25, expressed in at least 10% of endothelial cells). Background genes were all genes in the NicheNet model that were expressed in at least 10% of receiver cells.

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB+ fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5+ early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2+ fibroblasts and PEAR1+ fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in ‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’ (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation.

We explored the mesenchymal–epithelial interactions that instruct early HF formation. Receptor–ligand analysis predicted interactions between CXCL12 expressed by pre-Dc cells (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h) with ACKR3 on epidermal basal cells (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Table 8). RNAscope analysis confirmed that these two genes co-located (Fig. 2h). This result suggests that CXCL12 probably interacts with ACKR3 to mediate the migration of pre-Dc cells,. Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand–receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12–CXCR4 and CXCL12–DPP4), (Extended Data Figs. 1f and 5a and Supplementary Table 8), which suggested that innate immune cells may support pre-Dc cell migration during early HF development. Additional experiments are required to functionally validate these interactions in prenatal hair formation.

Human skin organogenesis begins after gastrulation from two primary germ layers. The epidermis, the most superficial layer of the skin, melanocytes and neural cells arise from the ectoderm. The dermis, which is separated from the epidermis by the basement membrane and contains endothelial and mural cells, derives from the mesoderm (apart from facial and cranial skin, where it arises from ectoderm-derived neural crest cells). The skin appendages, which include hair follicles (HFs) and sebaceous glands, form in a cephalocaudal direction. Prenatal HFs start forming between 11 and 14 post-conception weeks (PCW), initiated by interactions between epidermal placodes (focal sites of epidermal layer thickening) and dermal condensates (aggregates of dermal fibroblasts), whereas sebaceous glands develop from around 16 PCW.