We explored the mesenchymal–epithelial interactions that instruct early HF formation. Receptor–ligand analysis predicted interactions between CXCL12 expressed by pre-Dc cells (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h) with ACKR3 on epidermal basal cells (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Table 8). RNAscope analysis confirmed that these two genes co-located (Fig. 2h). This result suggests that CXCL12 probably interacts with ACKR3 to mediate the migration of pre-Dc cells,. Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand–receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12–CXCR4 and CXCL12–DPP4), (Extended Data Figs. 1f and 5a and Supplementary Table 8), which suggested that innate immune cells may support pre-Dc cell migration during early HF development. Additional experiments are required to functionally validate these interactions in prenatal hair formation.

Consistent with this finding, multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining showed LYVE1+ and TML macrophages in close proximity to endothelial cells (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Video 1). Predicted ligand–receptor interactions were consistent with reciprocal communication between macrophages and endothelial cells to support angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell migration (for example, CXCL8–ACKR1 and CCL8–ACKR1), (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 28).

Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell–cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration– (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells,.

We used NicheNet (v.1.1.1) to infer ligand–target gene links by combining scRNA-seq data (prenatal skin and SkO) of interacting cells (sender and receiver cells) with existing knowledge on signalling and gene regulatory networks. An open-source R implementation including integrated data sources used in the analysis are available at GitHub (https://github.com/saeyslab/nichenetr). NicheNet’s ligand–activity analysis first assesses and ranks ligands in the sender cell type (macrophage subsets), which best predict observed changes in expression of target genes of interest in the receiver cell types (endothelial cells) compared with background genes. Potential ligands were defined as all ligands in the NicheNet model that were expressed in at least 10% of cells in each macrophage (sender) cluster and had at least one specific receptor expressed in at least 10% of endothelial (receiver) cells.

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA+FOXD1+SOX2low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1+SOX2+), which abuts the epithelial hair placode,. Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin,. Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP+, SOX2+), (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h).

Ligands were prioritized based on ligand activity scores, calculated as the Pearson correlation coefficient between a ligand’s target predictions and the observed target gene expression (Supplementary Table 35). The top 20 ligands were used to predict active target genes (top 200 overall) and construct the active ligand–target links (Supplementary Table 36). Receptors of the top-ranked ligands were identified from the NicheNet model, which filters for only bona fide ligand–receptor interactions documented in the literature and publicly available databases (Supplementary Table 37). To infer signalling paths, we defined our ligand (VEGFA, in red) and target genes (GATA2, in blue) of interest. NicheNet identifies which TFs best regulate the target genes and are most closely downstream of the ligand based on weights of the edges in its integrated ligand signalling and gene regulatory networks.

Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in ‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’ (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation.

Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN+ basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

The Dc, for which formation is accompanied by invagination of the placode, expressed FAM3C and EFNB1, which were, respectively, predicted to interact with LAMP1 or CXADR and EPHB6 on the placode, and have been reported to promote cell migration and invasion, (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8). Finally, RSPO3 from the Dp was predicted to interact with LGR4 and LGR6 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8) in overlying matrix cells to contribute to the proliferation of HF epithelial cells. Notably, the highlighted interactions were conserved between the mesenchymal and epithelial cells of the SkO model for corresponding stages during HF formation (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 8). These results provide orthogonal validation of our findings and reinforce the utility of the SkO as an accurate model of prenatal skin development.

The shortest paths between these TFs and the defined ligand are selected and genes along these paths are considered as relevant signalling mediators (in grey). Signalling mediators are prioritized by cross-checking the interactions between the defined ligand, target genes and identified TFs and signalling mediators across the different integrated data sources in NicheNet.

Inferred trajectory and pseudotime analysis of epidermal cells in the integrated prenatal skin and SkO data predicted the differentiation of POSTN+ basal cells into two paths: ORS/CL trajectory, comprising DPYSL2+ basal cells, ORS and CL; and IRS trajectory, involving placode, matrix, cuticle/cortex and IRS (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 7). Along the ORS/CL trajectory, we identified new genes upregulated by DPYSL2+ basal cells, such as AGR2, and previously reported genes related to ORS differentiation (BARX2 and SOX9), (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). AGR2 was downregulated along the IRS trajectory, whereas known matrix markers such as SHH and WNT10B, were upregulated (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). Loss of AGR2, which functions in the assembly of cysteine-rich receptors enriched in HFs, promotes cell migration.

Several target genes of GATA2 and NFATC1 (for example, VWF), which were expressed across the venular trajectory pseudotime and are involved in endothelial cell differentiation, were downregulated in the SkO capillary arterioles compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11c,f). An orthogonal approach (NicheNet) identified macrophage-expressed VEGFA as one of the top upstream ligands that regulate differences in GATA2 expression between prenatal skin and SkO endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 11g and Supplementary Tables 35–37). These findings suggest that high VEGF production in the SkO cannot compensate for missing macrophage-related factors that drive GATA2 activity and downstream VEGF receptor expression (Fig. 4e).

Prenatal skin interfaces with the amniotic fluid in a sterile environment. However, immune cells such as macrophages seed the skin as early as 6 PCW and express a range of pro-inflammatory genes, although genes relating to antigen presentation (for example, major histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII)) are only upregulated after 11 PCW. Decoupling of the expression of pro-inflammatory genes from MHCII genes before 11 PCW suggests that antigen presentation may not be a key function of human macrophages during early gestation. Together with evidence of their role in tissue homeostasis, and healing in mouse models,, this raises the question of whether macrophages contribute to human early skin morphogenesis.

TML macrophages were also predicted to co-locate with Schwann cells in prenatal skin (‘early neurovascular microenvironment’, ME1) (Figs. 1d and 3g) and expressed genes related to cell migration and neural development (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 22 and 23), which mirrored the functions of brain microglia and peripheral nerve-associated macrophages in mouse skin. TML macrophages were predicted to interact with Schwann cells, contributing to synapse formation and axon guidance (VEGFA–NRP1, VEGFA–NRP2, SEMA3C–NRP2 and SEMA3E–PLXND1) (Extended Data Fig. 8h and Supplementary Table 8). These findings suggest that prenatal skin macrophages may support the establishment of the skin peripheral nervous system during early gestation, as previously reported in mouse skin.

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB+ fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5+ early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2+ fibroblasts and PEAR1+ fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

A gene interaction network was first built by querying the STRING database with GATA2 target genes, then pruned to only keep genes reported as associated with GATA2. The list was further truncated to 12 genes, by keeping genes that met the following criteria: (1) TFs in the five most active regulons detected in fetal skin; and/or (2) organoid capillary arterioles; and/or (3) associated with pseudotime (that is, in trajectories); and/or (4) VEGF receptors; and/or (5) in the selected gene ontology terms chosen for their role in angiogenesis, extracellular matrix organization, or cell migration, communication, proliferation, or death (GO:0045765, GO:0001568, GO:0030334, GO:0010646, GO:0001936, GO:0045446, GO:0002040, GO:0030155, GO:0010941 and GO:0030198).

We also assessed the expression profiles of genes previously reported in mouse HF formation. Similar signalling pathways were upregulated, including WNT and EDA for hair placode specification, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and noggin to inhibit hair formation in IFE cells, and PDGFA and TGFβ signalling for HF down growth (Extended Data Fig. 5f). Additionally, similar to fibroblast differentiation in mouse skin, pre-Dcs, the Dc and Dp and dermal fibroblasts in human prenatal skin also originated from a common fibroblast progenitor (HOXC5+ early fibroblast) (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 4d). However, cross-species data integration of human and mouse HF showed that human pre-Dc cells and the Dc aligned not only to their counterparts in mouse skin but also to fibroblasts in earlier stages of differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 5g–i and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11).

Macrophages have been implicated in angiogenesis during prenatal organ development and in the postnatal setting such as cancer-related angiogenesis,. Furthermore, macrophages expressing pro-angiogenic genes have been observed in diverse tissues during human development. Visium deconvolution analysis predicted co-location of prenatal skin macrophages with endothelial cells (‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’, ME1 and ME5) (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e). Gene ontology analysis showed that the four macrophage subsets (LYVE1+, MHCII+, TML and iron-recycling) expressed gene programs that drive angiogenesis (Supplementary Tables 23–26). Gene module expression profiles suggested that sprouting angiogenesis (growth of new vessels) was promoted by LYVE1+ and TML macrophages, blood vessel morphogenesis by LYVE1+ macrophages and endothelial cell chemotaxis by iron-recycling macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 8i and Supplementary Table 27).

For cell type abundance correlation analysis, we used a per-spot normalized Xn matrix. Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated for each pair of cell types (all possible pairs computed) and each sample. For visualization of correlation analysis, selected cell pairs were plotted, guided by NMF results and which cell groups or categories formed microenvironments. For example, macrophages formed microenvironments with endothelial cells (ME1 and ME5), with neural cells (ME1 and ME5) and fibroblasts (ME1, ME4 and ME5) in Fig. 1d (Supplementary Table 40).

Anti-angiogenic genes (for example, WNT5A) and corresponding receptors were highly expressed in SkO, whereas pro-angiogenic genes (for example, CXCL8) were upregulated in prenatal skin and primarily expressed by macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 11a and Supplementary Tables 30–34). Although expression of vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF), VEGFA and VEGFB were increased in SkO cells, their receptors (KDR and FLT1) on SkO capillary arterioles were downregulated compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11b,c). These receptors are known downstream targets of GATA2, which has a key role in angiogenesis during development and regulates VEGF-induced endothelial cell migration and sprouting in vitro. Regulon analysis showed that GATA2 and related regulons (for example, NFATC1) were downregulated in SkO capillary arterioles (Extended Data Fig. 11d,e).

Additional comparison with a human ES cell-derived and iPS cell-derived blood vessel organoid, which also lacked immune cells, further demonstrated the limited vasculature differentiation of this mesoderm-geared blood vessel organoid model (Extended Data Fig. 10d). This result confirms that immune cells are required to fully recapitulate in vivo endothelial cell development.

A summary output file was created for each analysis run, compiling the interactions for each cell pair (P < 0.05) and adjusting P values for multiple testing (FDR set at 0.05) (Supplementary Tables 8 and 28). Circos plots (Circlize package (v.0.4.15)) were used for downstream visualizations of selected significant (adjusted P value < 0.05) interactions between co-locating cell types for interactions found in all subsampled analyses.

We also observed a visibly more refined network and a trend towards reduced endothelial density in a two-dimensional angiogenesis assay of iPS cell-derived endothelial cells cultured with and without macrophages over 72 h (Extended Data Fig. 11i). Collectively, our findings demonstrate that interactions between macrophages and endothelial cells are required to support angiogenesis through blood vessel remodelling.

Target genes of interest were identified as DEGs between conditions (prenatal skin versus SkO) in receiver cells using FindMarkers function in NicheNet (adjusted P value ≤ 0.05 and average log2(fold change) > 0.25, expressed in at least 10% of endothelial cells). Background genes were all genes in the NicheNet model that were expressed in at least 10% of receiver cells.

To explore inferred interactions between macrophage subsets and endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 9a), we aggregated the interactions predicted for each macrophage subset and the different subtypes of endothelial cells (early endothelial cells, arterioles, capillary arterioles, capillaries, postcapillary venules and venules) by averaging the means and using the minimum of the adjusted P values as previously described. A curated list of aggregated interactions were plotted for visualization using ggplot2 (v.3.3.6). A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2+ basal, POSTN+ basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g).

Cells were then incubated overnight at 4 °C on a shaker (65 r.p.m.) with the first primary antibody, anti-CD45 (1:100, clone YAML501.4, ThermoFisher) for macrophages, for 48 h. The morning after, cells were washed and then incubated with the first secondary antibody overnight (goat anti-rat IgG, Alexa Fluor Plus 647, ThermoFisher). The morning after, SkOs were washed and incubated with the second primary antibody, anti-CD31 (1:100, clone JC70A, Dako) for endothelial cells for 48 h. The SkOs were then washed and incubated with the second secondary antibody (goat anti-mouse IgG1, Alexa Fluor 568, ThermoFisher) and DAPI overnight on a shaker. Cells were washed and placed in 50% glycerol for 30 min on a shaker at room temperature. Cells were then transferred to 70% glycerol overnight on a shaker at room temperature. The following morning, the co-culture was mounted and imaged using a custom 4-camera spinning disk confocal microscope.

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29). Inferred trajectory analysis showed that early endothelial cells in prenatal skin differentiated into either an arteriolar pathway (capillaries, capillary arterioles and arterioles) or venular pathway (postcapillary venules and venules), with expression of characteristic genes (for example, GJA5 for arteriolar and PLVAP for venular) (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a–c). Unlike SkO capillary arteriole cells, prenatal skin capillary arteriole cells could further differentiate into arterioles (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a).

Although we note similarities between human and mouse in the signalling pathways co-ordinating HF formation, our study reveals key cross-species distinctions in the differentiation tempo of HF mesenchymal cells. Future studies are required to fully delineate the features that distinguish human skin development.

To characterize the role of distinct lineages and cell states during human prenatal skin development, we obtained single-cell suspensions of skin from 7 to 17 PCW, spanning the first and second trimesters (Fig. 1a). We performed fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) to isolate live, single immune (CD45+) and non-immune (CD45–) populations and to enhance keratinocyte and endothelial cell capture before scRNA-seq profiling (Extended Data Fig. 1a and Supplementary Tables 1 and 2). Single-cell αβ T cell receptor (TCR) sequencing data were generated to accurately resolve T cell subsets. Spatial validation was carried out using multiplex RNA in situ hybridization (RNAscope), newly generated spatial transcriptomics (Visium) data from embryonic facial and abdominal skin, and published Visium data from embryonic limb from which only skin areas were analysed (Fig. 1a and Supplementary Table 2).

Successful co-culture with immune cells has been demonstrated in some organoid systems,. We identified a crucial role of macrophages in vascular network remodelling after adding macrophages to hair-bearing iPS cell-derived SkOs. Not only is this important for our understanding of the diverse cellular interactions that mediate morphogenesis but it also has practical implications for in vitro models, which commonly fail to vascularize. Our study provides further insights into human HF formation and the origin of the CL, which seems to develop along the same trajectory as the ORS. These findings are consistent with recent results from mouse studies,, which showed that CL development occurs before hair matrix formation and there is greater transcriptional similarity of CL cells to ORS cells.

To locate cells identified from scRNA-seq data in situ, we performed Cell2location analysis of spatial transcriptomics data of facial and abdominal skin (10 PCW) and embryonic lower limb skin (6–8 PCW) (Supplementary Table 2). We assessed cell type co-location using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to computationally predict microenvironments in conjunction with correlation analyses. Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). NMF can predict significant cellular co-locations that are not readily evident in conventional histopathology analyses,. Our analysis predicted distinct microenvironments in prenatal skin comprising epidermal, dermal, vascular and neural cells, each including specific types of immune cells (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f).

The PySCENIC package (v.0.11.2) and pipeline were used to identify TFs and their target genes in the combined prenatal skin and SkO scRNA-seq datasets. The ranking database (hg38 refseq-r80 500bp_up_and_100bp_down_tss.mc9nr.feather), motif annotation database (motifs-v9-nr.hgnc-m0.001-o0.0.tbl) were downloaded from the Aert’s laboratory GitHub page. The tool was run 10 times, with a dataset comprising at most 1,000 cells per cell type × tissue pair (where tissue is prenatal skin or SkO). For each run, an adjacency matrix of TFs and their targets was generated and pruned using the Aert’s group suggested parameters. Only regulons present in at least 6 out of 10 runs were used in the analysis. PySCENIC was used to calculate the regulon specificity score for each cell type × tissue pair using the aucell function. An average was computed over the multiple runs. These average scores were used to compare regulon activity between prenatal skin and SkO.

This result suggests that for corresponding cell types, HF fibroblasts are in a more differentiated state in mouse compared to human prenatal skin. Additionally, dermal fibroblast differentiation into histologically defined subsets (papillary and reticular) has been reported to occur early in mice (about embryonic day 12.5). Our human prenatal skin fibroblasts did not significantly express papillary fibroblast markers (for example, COL13A1) (Extended Data Fig. 5j), which suggested that the distinction between papillary and reticular fibroblasts emerges after 17 PCW. These distinctions between human and mouse skin may be attributed to organismal differences in gestation lengths and tempo of differentiation. Cellular differentiation occurs at a quicker pace in mice, whereas the longer gestation period in humans permits more advanced maturation to take place in utero.

This led us to infer a potential contribution of macrophages in scarless healing in prenatal skin. Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1+ macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2+ fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair,.

Innate immune cells, such as macrophages and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), were present from early gestation, whereas B cells and T cells emerged later, accompanying thymus, bone marrow and spleen formation from around 10 PCW (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Some subsets of macrophages, ILCs and fibroblasts exhibited distinct gene expression profiles between early and late gestation, which suggested that functional maturation or dual waves of production occur during development (Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 1d).

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (Treg) cells, and in control of autoimmunity (CD24). This result highlighted the potential role of Treg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). Treg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin,. RNAscope (FOXP3+) and immunofluorescence staining (FOXP3+) showed that Treg cells were primarily located within and around HFs compared to interfollicular skin as early as 15 PCW (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3g,h).

We recently identified yolk-sac derived TREM2+ macrophages that share an expression profile (P2RY12, CX3CR1 and OLFML3) with microglia-like macrophages from other developing organs, such as the brain, prenatal skin and gonads, (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f). Prenatal skin TREM2+ microglia-like (TML) macrophages were highly correlated with embryonic brain microglia (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b) and co-expressed immunomodulatory genes, including immune-inhibitory receptors (for example, CX3CR1) and regulators of IL-6 production (for example, SYT11) (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 19–23). Downregulation of inflammation and IL-6 confers anti-fibrogenic properties in mouse skin transplants and in fetal wounds,. TML macrophages were predicted to co-locate with WNT2+ fibroblasts in early prenatal skin (6–8 PCW) (Fig. 3c,d) and WNT2+ fibroblasts had downregulated IL6 expression compared with adult fibroblasts (Fig. 3a).

This aggregated alignment reflects whether the time points are matched or mismatched across genes on average (that is, if there is a higher proportion of gene-level alignments at which a specific time point pair between the two trajectories is matched, then the average alignment includes them as a match).

Sorting by flow cytometry was performed with a BD FACSAria Fusion flow cytometer. The CD45+ fraction was sorted from the DAPI–CD45+ gate, and the CD45– fraction was sorted from the DAPI–CD45– gate. CD45 gating was contiguous so that no live cells were lost in sorting. Live CD45+ and CD45– cells were sorted into separate chilled FACS tubes coated with FBS. For samples F220 and F221, CD34+ and CD34– fractions were sorted from CD45–CD34+ and CD45–CD34– gates, respectively. For samples F69 and F71, in addition to the live CD45+ and CD45– cells, we isolated all cells from the CD45– fraction that were not within the CD34+CD14– gate and collected them into a separate chilled FACS tubes coated with FBS (Extended Data Fig. 1a).

To compare prenatal skin cells with external datasets (adult HF, embryonic macrophages, blood vessel organoid, reindeer skin),,,, the datasets were downsampled to have roughly balanced cell counts per annotated cell type before integration with Harmony (v.0.0.5), treating datasets as batches and within dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal skin, site for embryonic macrophages, group (cell line: day of culture) for blood vessel organoid, chemistry for reindeer skin).

We next investigated additional mechanisms for failed expansion and differentiation of SkO endothelial cells. Expression of genes and gene modules related to blood flow and hypoxia were lower in SkO than in prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 10e,f and Supplementary Table 29). However, sprouting angiogenesis potential, assessed by scoring the ‘tip’ cell state, was increased in both SkO capillary arteriole cells and prenatal skin arteriole, capillary arteriole and capillary cells (Extended Data Fig. 10g,h). This suggests that despite strong expression of the sprouting angiogenesis gene signature, SkO capillary arteriole cells are unable to guide stalk cells for new blood vessel formation.

By contrast, prenatal skin fibroblasts had upregulated genes involved in immune suppression (CD200), regulation of inflammation (for example, RAMP2) and tissue regeneration (MDK) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13–15).

Our prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset comprised 534,581 cells, of which 433,961 cells passed quality control (Extended Data Fig. 1b). Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3). Differential abundance analysis testing revealed how different cell populations varied across gestation. Among ectoderm-derived cells, neural cells and the periderm, which constitutes the first skin permeability barrier, were enriched in early gestation, whereas suprabasal epidermal and HF cells were mainly observed in later gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Mesoderm-derived cells, including skin fibroblasts and endothelial cells, and immune cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4).

Endothelial cells were derived from Kolf2.1S iPS cells cultured on Matrigel-coated plates in mTeSR1 medium with ROCK inhibitor at 4.5 × 104 cells per cm2. iPS cells were differentiated through lateral mesoderm into CD144+ endothelial cells as previously described. Macrophages and SkOs were also derived from Kolf2.1S iPS cells according to previously published methods,. The angiogenesis assay was carried out by culturing iPS cell-derived endothelial cells and macrophages separately or in co-culture in 15-well 3D chambered µ-slide (ibidi, 81506). This was done using a three-layered sandwich method, whereby layer one was 10 µl Matrigel (Corning, 354230), layer two was supplemented StemPro medium (Gibco, 10639011) + 10% Matrigel with and without the endothelial cells and layer three was supplemented StemPro medium with and without macrophages. The endothelial cells were left to settle for 4 h at 37 °C before addition of macrophages.

The assay was imaged 2 h after initial culture and then every 24 h for 3 days using an EVOS 7000 microscope, and images were analysed using Fiji distribution of the ImageJ software (v.2.14.0). Before co-culture, iPS cell-derived macrophages were phenotyped using flow cytometry (Extended Data Fig. 11h). Macrophages were collected using TrypLE (Gibco) at 37 °C, 5% CO2 for 5 min, and cells were collected by centrifugation (300g for 6 min). Cells were washed once with cell staining buffer (BioLegend) before cell counting and antibody staining. Nonspecific bindings were blocked using Human TruStain FcX (Fc receptor blocking solution, BioLegend) for 10 min on ice and then stained using a Fixable Blue Dead Cell Stain kit for 10 min on ice (1:500 in PBS, ThermoFisher). Cells were washed twice with cell staining buffer.