We explored the mesenchymal–epithelial interactions that instruct early HF formation. Receptor–ligand analysis predicted interactions between CXCL12 expressed by pre-Dc cells (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h) with ACKR3 on epidermal basal cells (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Table 8). RNAscope analysis confirmed that these two genes co-located (Fig. 2h). This result suggests that CXCL12 probably interacts with ACKR3 to mediate the migration of pre-Dc cells,. Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand–receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12–CXCR4 and CXCL12–DPP4), (Extended Data Figs. 1f and 5a and Supplementary Table 8), which suggested that innate immune cells may support pre-Dc cell migration during early HF development. Additional experiments are required to functionally validate these interactions in prenatal hair formation.

Consistent with this finding, multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining showed LYVE1+ and TML macrophages in close proximity to endothelial cells (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Video 1). Predicted ligand–receptor interactions were consistent with reciprocal communication between macrophages and endothelial cells to support angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell migration (for example, CXCL8–ACKR1 and CCL8–ACKR1), (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 28).

Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell–cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration– (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells,.

We used NicheNet (v.1.1.1) to infer ligand–target gene links by combining scRNA-seq data (prenatal skin and SkO) of interacting cells (sender and receiver cells) with existing knowledge on signalling and gene regulatory networks. An open-source R implementation including integrated data sources used in the analysis are available at GitHub (https://github.com/saeyslab/nichenetr). NicheNet’s ligand–activity analysis first assesses and ranks ligands in the sender cell type (macrophage subsets), which best predict observed changes in expression of target genes of interest in the receiver cell types (endothelial cells) compared with background genes. Potential ligands were defined as all ligands in the NicheNet model that were expressed in at least 10% of cells in each macrophage (sender) cluster and had at least one specific receptor expressed in at least 10% of endothelial (receiver) cells.

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA+FOXD1+SOX2low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1+SOX2+), which abuts the epithelial hair placode,. Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin,. Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP+, SOX2+), (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h).

Ligands were prioritized based on ligand activity scores, calculated as the Pearson correlation coefficient between a ligand’s target predictions and the observed target gene expression (Supplementary Table 35). The top 20 ligands were used to predict active target genes (top 200 overall) and construct the active ligand–target links (Supplementary Table 36). Receptors of the top-ranked ligands were identified from the NicheNet model, which filters for only bona fide ligand–receptor interactions documented in the literature and publicly available databases (Supplementary Table 37). To infer signalling paths, we defined our ligand (VEGFA, in red) and target genes (GATA2, in blue) of interest. NicheNet identifies which TFs best regulate the target genes and are most closely downstream of the ligand based on weights of the edges in its integrated ligand signalling and gene regulatory networks.

Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in ‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’ (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation.

Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN+ basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

The Dc, for which formation is accompanied by invagination of the placode, expressed FAM3C and EFNB1, which were, respectively, predicted to interact with LAMP1 or CXADR and EPHB6 on the placode, and have been reported to promote cell migration and invasion, (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8). Finally, RSPO3 from the Dp was predicted to interact with LGR4 and LGR6 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8) in overlying matrix cells to contribute to the proliferation of HF epithelial cells. Notably, the highlighted interactions were conserved between the mesenchymal and epithelial cells of the SkO model for corresponding stages during HF formation (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5c and Supplementary Table 8). These results provide orthogonal validation of our findings and reinforce the utility of the SkO as an accurate model of prenatal skin development.

The shortest paths between these TFs and the defined ligand are selected and genes along these paths are considered as relevant signalling mediators (in grey). Signalling mediators are prioritized by cross-checking the interactions between the defined ligand, target genes and identified TFs and signalling mediators across the different integrated data sources in NicheNet.

Inferred trajectory and pseudotime analysis of epidermal cells in the integrated prenatal skin and SkO data predicted the differentiation of POSTN+ basal cells into two paths: ORS/CL trajectory, comprising DPYSL2+ basal cells, ORS and CL; and IRS trajectory, involving placode, matrix, cuticle/cortex and IRS (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 7). Along the ORS/CL trajectory, we identified new genes upregulated by DPYSL2+ basal cells, such as AGR2, and previously reported genes related to ORS differentiation (BARX2 and SOX9), (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). AGR2 was downregulated along the IRS trajectory, whereas known matrix markers such as SHH and WNT10B, were upregulated (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). Loss of AGR2, which functions in the assembly of cysteine-rich receptors enriched in HFs, promotes cell migration.

Several target genes of GATA2 and NFATC1 (for example, VWF), which were expressed across the venular trajectory pseudotime and are involved in endothelial cell differentiation, were downregulated in the SkO capillary arterioles compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11c,f). An orthogonal approach (NicheNet) identified macrophage-expressed VEGFA as one of the top upstream ligands that regulate differences in GATA2 expression between prenatal skin and SkO endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 11g and Supplementary Tables 35–37). These findings suggest that high VEGF production in the SkO cannot compensate for missing macrophage-related factors that drive GATA2 activity and downstream VEGF receptor expression (Fig. 4e).