neural development (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 22 and 23), which mirrored the functions of brain microglia and peripheral nerve-associated macrophages in mouse skin 65 . TML macrophages were predicted to interact with Schwann cells, contributing to synapse formation and axon guidance (VEGFA-NRP1, VEGFA-NRP2, SEMA3C-NRP2 and SEMA3E-PLXND1) 66 (Extended Data Fig. 8h and Supplementary Table 8). These findings suggest that prenatal skin macrophages may support the establishment of the skin peripheral nervous system during early gestation, as previously reported in mouse skin 65 .

Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart 56 . Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1-IGF1R and GRN-EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1 + macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts. 

We recently identified yolk-sac derived TREM2 + macrophages that share an expression profile (P2RY12, CX3CR1 and OLFML3) with microglia-like macrophages from other developing organs, such as the brain, prenatal skin and gonads 57,58 (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f). Prenatal skin TREM2 + microglia-like (TML) macrophages were highly correlated with embryonic brain microglia 57 (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b) and co-expressed immunomodulatory genes, including immune-inhibitory receptors (for example, CX3CR1) and regulators of IL-6 production (for example, SYT11) 59 (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 19-23). Downregulation of inflammation and IL-6 confers anti-fibrogenic properties in mouse skin transplants and in fetal wounds 60,61 . TML macrophages were predicted to co-locate with WNT2 + fibroblasts in early prenatal skin (6-8 PCW) (Fig. 3c,d) and WNT2 + fibroblasts had downregulated IL6 expression compared with adult fibroblasts (Fig. 3a). This led us to infer a potential contribution of macrophages in scarless healing in prenatal skin. Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1 + macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair 62,63 .

TML macrophages were also predicted to co-locate with Schwann cells in prenatal skin ('early neurovascular microenvironment', ME1) (Figs. 1d and 3g) and expressed genes related to cell migration and

In this study, we characterized the dynamic composition of human prenatal skin during the early stages of de novo HF formation and highlighted the crucial skin immune and non-immune crosstalk that contributes to skin morphogenesis, results that are in line with emerging evidence in animal and human studies 69,75 . Our atlas indicated that macrophages contribute to scarless skin repair, fibroblast homeostasis and neurovascular development. This is in part contributed to by yolk-sac derived TML macrophages, which suggests that these cells have broader functions outside the central nervous system in early gestation. The presence of TML macrophages has previously been identified in several prenatal organs 5,58,69 . 

Successful co-culture with immune cells has been demonstrated in some organoid systems 76,77 . We identified a crucial role of macrophages in vascular network remodelling after adding macrophages to hair-bearing iPS cell-derived SkOs. Not only is this important for our understanding of the diverse cellular interactions that mediate morphogenesis but it also has practical implications for in vitro models, which commonly fail to vascularize 78 . Our study provides further insights into human HF formation and the origin of the CL, which seems to develop along the same trajectory as the ORS. These findings are consistent with recent results from mouse studies 26,79 , which showed that CL development occurs before hair matrix formation 79 and there is greater transcriptional similarity of CL cells to ORS cells 25 . Although we note similarities between human and mouse in the signalling pathways co-ordinating HF formation, our study reveals key cross-species distinctions in the differentiation tempo of HF mesenchymal cells. Future studies are required to fully delineate the features that distinguish human skin development.

genes before 11 PCW 5 suggests that antigen presentation may not be a key function of human macrophages during early gestation. Together with evidence of their role in tissue homeostasis 6,7 and healing in mouse models 8,9 , this raises the question of whether macrophages contribute to human early skin morphogenesis. 

Our current study provides a comprehensive multi-omics cell atlas of 7-17 PCW human prenatal skin. We profiled human prenatal skin using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), spatial transcriptomics and multiplex RNA in situ hybridization to decode the dynamic cellular and molecular changes across gestation that regulate skin and HF morphogenesis. We leveraged adult healthy skin and HF datasets 10,11 to compare and assess developmental-specific features that contribute to scarless skin healing and cues that guide de novo HF formation. We used a hair-bearing SkO model 1 to validate the role of macrophages in prenatal skin vascular network formation.

Macrophages have been implicated in angiogenesis during prenatal organ development and in the postnatal setting such as cancerrelated angiogenesis 67,68 . Furthermore, macrophages expressing pro-angiogenic genes have been observed in diverse tissues during human development 69 . Visium deconvolution analysis predicted co-location of prenatal skin macrophages with endothelial cells ('early and late neurovascular microenvironments', ME1 and ME5) (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e). Gene ontology analysis showed that the four macrophage subsets (LYVE1 + , MHCII + , TML and iron-recycling) expressed gene programs that drive angiogenesis (Supplementary Tables 23-26). Gene module expression profiles suggested that sprouting angiogenesis (growth of new vessels) was promoted by LYVE1 + and TML macrophages, blood vessel morphogenesis by LYVE1 + macrophages and endothelial cell chemotaxis by iron-recycling macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 8i and Supplementary Table 27). Consistent with this finding, multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining showed LYVE1 + and TML macrophages in close proximity to endothelial cells (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Video 1). Predicted ligandreceptor interactions were consistent with reciprocal communication between macrophages and endothelial cells to support angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell migration (for example, CXCL8-ACKR1 and CCL8-ACKR1) 10,70 (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 28). 

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29).

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. (e) Gene expression plots for representative genes in prenatal skin (green) and SkO (blue) across pseudotime. Left column: the interpolated log1p transformed expression (y-axis) against pseudotime (x-axis). and percent of expressing cells (dot size) of marker genes 5 used to annotate macrophage subsets in prenatal skin. (g) Circos plot visualisation of representative significant (adjusted p-value <0.05, significance calculated in CellphoneDB using empirical shuffling and FDR-adjusted) predicted interactions between macrophages (LYVE1 + and TML macrophage) and co-localising WNT2 + fibroblasts in prenatal skin. Arrows represent directionality of interactions (ligand to receptor); connection width is proportional to the CellphoneDB mean value for each ligand-receptor pair. ASDC, Axl + Siglec6 + dendritic cells; DC, dendritic cells; LC, Langerhans cells. between embryonic immune cells (x-axis) and prenatal skin (y-axis) myeloid cell states for a logistic regression model trained on embryonic data 57 and projected onto prenatal skin myeloid cell subset. TML macrophage had the highest proportion prediction to Mac4 (embryonic brain microglia). (c) Gene set enrichment analysis results of over-expressed genes (wilcoxon, two-sided, Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted) in macrophage subsets (TML, Iron-recycling, LYVE1 + and MHCII + , macrophages). Each plot shows the top 10 enriched gene sets (using Gene Ontology Biological Process 2023 (left) and MSigDB Hallmark 2020 (right) databases). The x-axis shows the negative log

Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1 + macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair 62,63 . 

We further compared prenatal skin fibroblasts and macrophages to their counterparts in reindeer skin from antlers, which heal without scarring, and in back skin, which scars 64 . Early-gestation human skin fibroblasts had a higher probability of correspondence to pro-regenerative reindeer fibroblasts, whereas in later gestation, the probability of matching to pro-fibrotic fibroblasts was higher (Extended Data Fig. 8d and Supplementary Table 19). Accordingly, several pro-regenerative genes (for example, CRABP1 and MDK) were downregulated in late gestation prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 8e and Supplementary Table 20). Notably, prenatal skin macrophages resembled 'early macrophages' that are enriched in reindeer antler skin but not macrophages in back skin (Extended Data Fig. 8f and Supplementary Table 21). Using a scratch assay of SkO-derived fibroblasts cultured with or without iPS cell-derived macrophages, we demonstrated that scratch wound width closure was improved when fibroblasts were co-cultured with macrophages over 72 h (Extended Data Fig. 8g). 

Collectively, our findings suggest that prenatal skin fibroblasts in early gestation downregulate genes involved in extracellular matrix formation, collagen deposition and inflammation, which may favour tissue regeneration over scarring. Based on our data and previous studies, we also posit a potential role for early skin macrophages in conferring the distinct property of scarless healing in early prenatal skin. However, further studies are required to fully elucidate the interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts in human prenatal skin and to conclusively establish their role in scarless healing.

Human prenatal skin is populated by innate immune cells, including macrophages, but whether they act solely in immunity or have additional functions in morphogenesis is unclear. Here we assembled a comprehensive multi-omics reference atlas of prenatal human skin (7–17 post-conception weeks), combining single-cell and spatial transcriptomics data, to characterize the microanatomical tissue niches of the skin. This atlas revealed that crosstalk between non-immune and immune cells underpins the formation of hair follicles, is implicated in scarless wound healing and is crucial for skin angiogenesis. We systematically compared a hair-bearing skin organoid (SkO) model derived from human embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells to prenatal and adult skin1. The SkO model closely recapitulated in vivo skin epidermal and dermal cell types during hair follicle development and expression of genes implicated in the pathogenesis of genetic hair and skin disorders. However, the SkO model lacked immune cells and had markedly reduced endothelial cell heterogeneity and quantity. Our in vivo prenatal skin cell atlas indicated that macrophages and macrophage-derived growth factors have a role in driving endothelial development. Indeed, vascular network remodelling was enhanced following transfer of autologous macrophages derived from induced pluripotent stem cells into SkO cultures. Innate immune cells are therefore key players in skin morphogenesis beyond their conventional role in immunity, a function they achieve through crosstalk with non-immune cells. A comprehensive multi-omics reference atlas of prenatal human skin shows that innate immune cells crosstalk with non-immune cells to perform pivotal roles in skin morphogenesis, including the formation of hair follicles.

Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). NMF can predict significant cellular co-locations that are not readily evident in conventional histopathology analyses 5,15 . Our analysis predicted distinct microenvironments in prenatal skin comprising epidermal, dermal, vascular and neural cells, each including specific types of immune cells (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in 'early and late neurovascular microenvironments' (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation. 

We next integrated and compared human prenatal and adult skin data 10 with the SkO model 1 . The aim was to determine the extent to which the SkO model recapitulates human skin differentiation at a molecular level and its potential utility to functionally assess the role of immune cells in skin morphogenesis (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a,b). Broadly, cell states were conserved among SkO, prenatal and adult skin, but SkO cell states matched prenatal skin more closely than adult skin across culture duration (Extended Data Fig. 2c,d and Supplementary Table 5). However, the tempo of differentiation varied across the distinct skin cell lineages. Even after 19 weeks of culture, fibroblasts, mural and Schwann cells had a low probability of correspondence to adult skin cell states (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5).

In addition to transcriptomics differences between fibroblast subsets enriched in early versus late gestation, we observed differences within the WNT2 + fibroblast population across gestation time (Extended Data Fig. 1d). Late gestation WNT2 + fibroblasts had upregulated genes related to extracellular matrix and collagen deposition (for example, COL1A1), whereas early WNT2 + fibroblasts had DEGs involved in cellular growth and differentiation (for example, SFRP1) (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 7d and Supplementary Tables 16-18). Notably, WNT2 + and PEAR1 + prenatal fibroblasts expressed several genes involved in cellular senescence (CDKN1A), cytokine pathways (for example, IL1R1) and collagen deposition (for example, POSTN) (Fig. 3a,b), which are highly expressed in pathogenic fibroblasts of fibrotic skin disorders 53 . These results provide further support for our finding of progressive acquisition of scar-promoting genes in later gestation, consistent with the clinical observation of scarring in third trimester skin 54 . 

The role of macrophages in promoting wound healing has been described in postnatal mouse skin and in adult human skin 55 . In prenatal skin, macrophage subsets (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f) were predicted to co-locate with fibroblasts, neural cells and vascular cells in distinct tissue microenvironments in early gestation (Fig. 1d). Specifically, LYVE1 + macrophages co-located with WNT2 + fibroblasts (Fig. 3c-e) and were predicted to interact through platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and corresponding receptors (PDGFRα and PDGFRβ) expressed on fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8). Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart 56 .

Cell state predictions: adult HFs, embryonic macrophages, blood vessel organoid, reindeer skin. To compare prenatal skin cells with external datasets (adult HF, embryonic macrophages, blood vessel organoid, reindeer skin) 11,57,64,71 , the datasets were downsampled to have roughly balanced cell counts per annotated cell type before integration with Harmony (v.0.0.5) 91 , treating datasets as batches and within dataset batches as covariates (donor for prenatal skin, site for embryonic macrophages, group (cell line: day of culture) for blood vessel organoid, chemistry for reindeer skin). 

Comparison of cell type correspondence between datasets and probability prediction was carried out using a LR framework similar to the CellTypist package 94 . A model was built using the implementation of the linear_model.LogisticRegression module from sklearn package (v.1.1.3) (parameters: penalty: L2, solver: saga, regularization strength C = 0.1) and trained on the gene expression matrix of the training dataset using all genes that passed quality control. The resulting model was used to predict the classes in the target dataset. The correspondence between predicted and original classes in the target dataset was computed as the Jaccard index and median probability predictions and visualized as heatmaps. For comparison of the prenatal skin macrophages with embryonic macrophages, the embryonic macrophage dataset was used as training data and prenatal skin macrophages as query; for comparison of the blood vessel organoid with prenatal skin, the prenatal skin dataset (downsampled to maximum of 500 cells per cell type) was used as training data and the blood vessel organoid data as query; for comparison of HF data, merged prenatal and organoid data were used as training data and adult dataset as query; for comparison of the prenatal skin fibroblasts and macrophages with reindeer skin fibroblasts and macrophages, the reindeer skin data subsets were used as training data and prenatal skin data subsets as query.

ME5, which shows co-locating macrophages and endothelial cells, is highlighted (grey). e, UMAP visualizations of the integrated prenatal skin, adult skin 10 and SkO 1 datasets, coloured by broad cell lineages. ASDC, Axl + Siglec6 + dendritic cells; DC, dendritic cells; HSC, haematopoietic stem cells; LC, Langerhans cells; LE, lymphatic endothelium; LTi, lymphoid tissue inducer cell; MEMP, megakaryocyte-erythroidmast cell progenitor; NK cell, natural killer cells; pDC, plasmacytoid dendritic cells. The images in a were created using BioRender (https://biorender.com). Inferred trajectory and pseudotime analysis of epidermal cells in the integrated prenatal skin and SkO data predicted the differentiation of POSTN + basal cells into two paths: ORS/CL trajectory, comprising DPYSL2 + basal cells, ORS and CL; and IRS trajectory, involving placode, matrix, cuticle/cortex and IRS (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 7). Along the ORS/CL trajectory, we identified new genes upregulated by DPYSL2 + basal cells, such as AGR2, and previously reported genes related to ORS differentiation (BARX2 and SOX9) 25,26 (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). AGR2 was downregulated along the IRS trajectory, whereas known matrix markers such as SHH and WNT10B 25,26 were upregulated (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). Loss of AGR2, which functions in the assembly of cysteine-rich receptors enriched in HFs, promotes cell migration 27 . Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN + basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

A combination of fibroblast and macrophage-associated molecular features potentially contribute to the ability of prenatal skin to heal without scarring, including the presence of fibroblast progenitors, a downregulated immune milieu and reduced collagen expression. However, we found progressive 'ageing' and acquisition of the adult 'pro-inflammatory' phenotype as early as 9 PCW, which could be targeted in fibroblasts to guide postnatal scarless healing. Future studies that align human fibroblast subsets across the lifespan are required to investigate the dynamics of scarless healing and the roles of mechanical forces, microbiota and environmental exposure on fibroblast functions. 

Our prenatal human skin atlas represents a valuable resource to explore genes that cause congenital hair and skin disorders and is freely accessible from our web portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/ fetal-skin). We found that implicated genes are indeed expressed during prenatal skin development and HF differentiation, thereby supporting an in utero origin for these disorders. Our systematic prenatal skin-SkO comparison provides a blueprint to guide more faithful in vitro SkO generation, which can facilitate future studies of interactions with the microbiota, the pathogenesis of congenital skin disorders, and hair and skin engineering for therapeutic applications, including hair regeneration and skin transplant.

Broad cell labels (epidermis, dermal stroma, immune and endothelium) and fine-grained annotations of cell states were assigned on the basis of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) (Fig. 1b, Extended Data Fig. 1c and Supplementary Table 3). Differential abundance analysis testing revealed how different cell populations varied across gestation. Among ectoderm-derived cells, neural cells and the periderm, which constitutes the first skin permeability barrier 2 , were enriched in early gestation, whereas suprabasal epidermal and HF cells were mainly observed in later gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Mesoderm-derived cells, including skin fibroblasts and endothelial cells, and immune cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Innate immune cells, such as macrophages and innate lymphoid cells (ILCs), were present from early gestation, whereas B cells and T cells emerged later, accompanying thymus, bone marrow and spleen formation from around 10 PCW (Fig. 1c, Extended Data Fig. 1d and Supplementary Table 4). Some subsets of macrophages, ILCs and fibroblasts exhibited distinct gene expression profiles between early and late gestation, which suggested that functional maturation or dual waves of production occur during development (Fig. 1c and Extended Data Fig. 1d). 

To locate cells identified from scRNA-seq data in situ, we performed Cell2location 15 analysis of spatial transcriptomics data of facial and abdominal skin (10 PCW) and embryonic lower limb skin (6-8 PCW) 12 (Supplementary Table 2). We assessed cell type co-location using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to computationally predict microenvironments in conjunction with correlation analyses. Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f).

Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation 1 . Within the dermal compartment, we observed HF-specialized fibroblasts, the dermal condensate (Dc) and dermal papilla (Dp), from 12 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c). 

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs 20 (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (T reg ) cells 21 , and in control of autoimmunity (CD24) 22 . This result highlighted the potential role of T reg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). T reg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin 23,24 . , adult healthy skin 10 and hair-bearing SkO 1 were integrated for comparison. Spatial experiments were carried out using RNAscope, immunofluorescence and Visium analyses. Findings of the study were functionally validated using a SkO co-culture. b, Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization of the prenatal skin dataset with broad annotation of cell states, as denoted by colour and number in the legend. c, Milo beeswarm plot showing the differential abundance of neighbourhoods in prenatal skin across gestation time, annotated by broad cell labels. Red and blue neighbourhoods are significantly enriched in earlier or later gestation, respectively. Colour intensity denotes degree of significance. d, Dotplot showing spatial microenvironments (MEs). Cell type to microenvironment coefficients are normalized by cell type sums, and cell type to microenvironment assignment is shown by colour. ME5, which shows co-locating macrophages and endothelial cells, is highlighted (grey).

The subsampled dataset were analysed separately using the permutation-based method to establish significance (P value cut-off = 0.05). For the analysis by early/late gestation, the prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset was first split into early (≤11 PCW) and late (≥12 PCW) gestation datasets, which were then subsampled (no more than 200 cells per cell type) and individually analysed (P value cut-off = 0.05). A summary output file was created for each analysis run, compiling the interactions for each cell pair (P < 0.05) and adjusting P values for multiple testing (FDR set at 0.05) (Supplementary Tables 8  and 28). Circos plots (Circlize package (v.0.4.15) 101 ) were used for downstream visualizations of selected significant (adjusted P value < 0.05) interactions between co-locating cell types for interactions found in all subsampled analyses. 

To explore inferred interactions between macrophage subsets and endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 9a), we aggregated the interactions predicted for each macrophage subset and the different subtypes of endothelial cells (early endothelial cells, arterioles, capillary arterioles, capillaries, postcapillary venules and venules) by averaging the means and using the minimum of the adjusted P values as previously described 5 . A curated list of aggregated interactions were plotted for visualization using ggplot2 (v. 3.3.6). A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2 + basal, POSTN + basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g).

Having mapped the differentiation of prenatal skin HFs, we leveraged this information to assess the extent to which genetic hair diseases have their roots in utero. Genes harbouring mutations known to cause reduced hair growth (hypotrichosis) or abnormally shaped hair (for example, pili torti) (Supplementary Table 12) were expressed along the ORS/CL trajectory, IRS trajectory and hair fibroblast trajectory pseudotimes (Extended Data Figs. 4f and 6a,b) and in prenatal HF cell Article states (Extended Data Fig. 6c). This finding suggested that these disorders result from dysfunctional HF development. 

Genes causing epidermolysis bullosa (EB), an inherited blistering skin disorder characterized by skin fragility secondary to structural defects in the epidermis and adjacent dermoepidermal junction 45 , were highly expressed in prenatal epidermal cells and at the dermoepidermal junction (Extended Data Fig. 6d,e). Gene therapy studies for dystrophic EB have identified fibroblasts expressing COL7A1 as a promising therapeutic strategy 46 . We observed COL7A1 expression across several fibroblast subsets in prenatal skin and SkOs (Extended Data Fig. 6d), which lends support to the gene therapy approaches. The expression of genes implicated in congenital ichthyoses, a group of disorders resulting from abnormal epidermal differentiation 47 , were primarily confined to keratinocytes (Extended Data Fig. 6f). 

Notably, we observed similar gene expression patterns across prenatal skin and SkO for the above described genetic hair and skin disorders (Extended Data Fig. 6c,d,f), which supported the value of the SkO as a model to study congenital diseases. Although we found that expression of genes implicated in these disorders are confined to structural cells, disease manifestations are often associated with immune infiltration, which implicates skin-immune crosstalk during pathogenesis 48,49 .

This suggests that despite strong expression of the sprouting angiogenesis gene signature, SkO capillary arteriole cells are unable to guide stalk cells for new blood vessel formation. 

Anti-angiogenic genes (for example, WNT5A) and corresponding receptors were highly expressed in SkO, whereas pro-angiogenic genes (for example, CXCL8) were upregulated in prenatal skin and primarily expressed by macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 11a and Supplementary Tables 30-34). Although expression of vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF), VEGFA and VEGFB were increased in SkO cells, their receptors (KDR and FLT1) on SkO capillary arterioles were downregulated compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11b,c). These receptors are known downstream targets of GATA2, which has a key role in angiogenesis during development and regulates VEGF-induced endothelial cell migration and sprouting in vitro 72 . Regulon analysis showed that GATA2 and related regulons (for example, NFATC1) were downregulated in SkO capillary arterioles (Extended Data Fig. 11d,e). Several target genes of GATA2 and NFATC1 (for example, VWF), which were expressed across the venular trajectory pseudotime and are involved in endothelial cell differentiation 73 , were downregulated in the SkO capillary arterioles compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11c,f). An orthogonal approach (NicheNet 74 ) identified macrophage-expressed VEGFA as one of the top upstream ligands that regulate differences in GATA2 expression between prenatal skin and SkO endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 11g and Supplementary Tables 35-37). These findings suggest that high VEGF production in the SkO cannot compensate for missing macrophage-related factors that drive GATA2 activity and downstream VEGF receptor expression (Fig. 4e).