Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5 + early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2 + fibroblasts and PEAR1 + fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

The adult fibroblast gene expression profile was increased in WNT2 + and PEAR1 + prenatal fibroblasts, which were abundant in later gestation (Fig. 3a and Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7b). Genes associated with a pro-inflammatory fibroblast phenotype (APOE, IGFBP7 and ITM2A) 43,52 were also upregulated during the transition from HOXC5 + fibroblasts into PEAR1 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7c). In addition to transcriptomics differences between fibroblast subsets enriched in early versus late gestation, we observed differences within the WNT2 + fibroblast population across gestation time (Extended Data Fig. 1d).

Late gestation WNT2 + fibroblasts had upregulated genes related to extracellular matrix and collagen deposition (for example, COL1A1), whereas early WNT2 + fibroblasts had DEGs involved in cellular growth and differentiation (for example, SFRP1) (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 7d and Supplementary Tables 16-18). Notably, WNT2 + and PEAR1 + prenatal fibroblasts expressed several genes involved in cellular senescence (CDKN1A), cytokine pathways (for example, IL1R1) and collagen deposition (for example, POSTN) (Fig. 3a,b), which are highly expressed in pathogenic fibroblasts of fibrotic skin disorders 53 .

Specifically, LYVE1 + macrophages co-located with WNT2 + fibroblasts (Fig. 3c-e) and were predicted to interact through platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and corresponding receptors (PDGFRα and PDGFRβ) expressed on fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8).

TML macrophages were predicted to co-locate with WNT2 + fibroblasts in early prenatal skin (6-8 PCW) (Fig. 3c,d) and WNT2 + fibroblasts had downregulated IL6 expression compared with adult fibroblasts (Fig. 3a).

Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1 + macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair.

Prenatal human skin is able to heal without scarring but loses this capacity after 24 PCW. By contrast, prenatal skin fibroblasts had upregulated genes involved in immune suppression (CD200), regulation of inflammation (for example, RAMP2) and tissue regeneration (MDK) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13-15).
