To locate cells identified from scRNA-seq data in situ, we performed Cell2location analysis of spatial transcriptomics data of facial and abdominal skin (10 PCW) and embryonic lower limb skin (6–8 PCW) (Supplementary Table 2). We assessed cell type co-location using non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to computationally predict microenvironments in conjunction with correlation analyses. Co-location was indicated by a high proportion of two or more cell types sharing a microenvironment (Fig. 1d) and/or by a positive correlation coefficient between cell pairs (Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). NMF can predict significant cellular co-locations that are not readily evident in conventional histopathology analyses,. Our analysis predicted distinct microenvironments in prenatal skin comprising epidermal, dermal, vascular and neural cells, each including specific types of immune cells (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f).

Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in ‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’ (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation.

By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the SkO model recapitulated the different components of prenatal skin HF, interfollicular epidermis, neural cells and dermal fibroblasts, but immune cells were not represented and endothelial cells were markedly reduced.

Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14–15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a).

Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation. Within the dermal compartment, we observed HF-specialized fibroblasts, the dermal condensate (Dc) and dermal papilla (Dp), from 12 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c).

Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN+ basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA+FOXD1+SOX2low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1+SOX2+), which abuts the epithelial hair placode,. Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin,. Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP+, SOX2+), (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h).

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB+ fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5+ early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2+ fibroblasts and PEAR1+ fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell–cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration– (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells,.

We also assessed the expression profiles of genes previously reported in mouse HF formation. Similar signalling pathways were upregulated, including WNT and EDA for hair placode specification, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and noggin to inhibit hair formation in IFE cells, and PDGFA and TGFβ signalling for HF down growth (Extended Data Fig. 5f). Additionally, similar to fibroblast differentiation in mouse skin, pre-Dcs, the Dc and Dp and dermal fibroblasts in human prenatal skin also originated from a common fibroblast progenitor (HOXC5+ early fibroblast) (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 4d). However, cross-species data integration of human and mouse HF showed that human pre-Dc cells and the Dc aligned not only to their counterparts in mouse skin but also to fibroblasts in earlier stages of differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 5g–i and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11).

Prenatal human skin is able to heal without scarring but loses this capacity after 24 PCW. Scars result from aggregation of collagen produced by dermal fibroblasts and failure of the overlying epidermis to completely regenerate. To identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms that may endow early prenatal skin with scarless healing properties, we investigated the temporal changes in composition and transcriptional profile of the dermal fibroblast subsets (Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7a). We first compared prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts with healthy adult skin fibroblasts. All adult fibroblast subsets expressed high levels of inflammatory cytokines and receptors (for example, IL6 and IL1RA) and genes involved in antigen presentation (for example, HLA-A), innate immune and inflammatory responses (for example, CD55 and PTGES) and cellular senescence (CDKN1A) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13–15).

The role of macrophages in promoting wound healing has been described in postnatal mouse skin and in adult human skin. In prenatal skin, macrophage subsets (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f) were predicted to co-locate with fibroblasts, neural cells and vascular cells in distinct tissue microenvironments in early gestation (Fig. 1d). Specifically, LYVE1+ macrophages co-located with WNT2+ fibroblasts (Fig. 3c–e) and were predicted to interact through platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and corresponding receptors (PDGFRα and PDGFRβ) expressed on fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8). Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart. Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1–IGF1R and GRN–EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1+ macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts.