Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14–15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a).

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (Treg) cells, and in control of autoimmunity (CD24). This result highlighted the potential role of Treg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). Treg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin,. RNAscope (FOXP3+) and immunofluorescence staining (FOXP3+) showed that Treg cells were primarily located within and around HFs compared to interfollicular skin as early as 15 PCW (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3g,h).

Inferred trajectory and pseudotime analysis of epidermal cells in the integrated prenatal skin and SkO data predicted the differentiation of POSTN+ basal cells into two paths: ORS/CL trajectory, comprising DPYSL2+ basal cells, ORS and CL; and IRS trajectory, involving placode, matrix, cuticle/cortex and IRS (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 7). Along the ORS/CL trajectory, we identified new genes upregulated by DPYSL2+ basal cells, such as AGR2, and previously reported genes related to ORS differentiation (BARX2 and SOX9), (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). AGR2 was downregulated along the IRS trajectory, whereas known matrix markers such as SHH and WNT10B, were upregulated (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). Loss of AGR2, which functions in the assembly of cysteine-rich receptors enriched in HFs, promotes cell migration.

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA+FOXD1+SOX2low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1+SOX2+), which abuts the epithelial hair placode,. Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin,. Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP+, SOX2+), (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h).

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB+ fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5+ early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2+ fibroblasts and PEAR1+ fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell–cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration– (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells,.

We also assessed the expression profiles of genes previously reported in mouse HF formation. Similar signalling pathways were upregulated, including WNT and EDA for hair placode specification, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and noggin to inhibit hair formation in IFE cells, and PDGFA and TGFβ signalling for HF down growth (Extended Data Fig. 5f). Additionally, similar to fibroblast differentiation in mouse skin, pre-Dcs, the Dc and Dp and dermal fibroblasts in human prenatal skin also originated from a common fibroblast progenitor (HOXC5+ early fibroblast) (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 4d). However, cross-species data integration of human and mouse HF showed that human pre-Dc cells and the Dc aligned not only to their counterparts in mouse skin but also to fibroblasts in earlier stages of differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 5g–i and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11).

Having mapped the differentiation of prenatal skin HFs, we leveraged this information to assess the extent to which genetic hair diseases have their roots in utero. Genes harbouring mutations known to cause reduced hair growth (hypotrichosis) or abnormally shaped hair (for example, pili torti) (Supplementary Table 12) were expressed along the ORS/CL trajectory, IRS trajectory and hair fibroblast trajectory pseudotimes (Extended Data Figs. 4f and 6a,b) and in prenatal HF cell states (Extended Data Fig. 6c). This finding suggested that these disorders result from dysfunctional HF development.

Collectively, our findings suggest that prenatal skin fibroblasts in early gestation downregulate genes involved in extracellular matrix formation, collagen deposition and inflammation, which may favour tissue regeneration over scarring. Based on our data and previous studies, we also posit a potential role for early skin macrophages in conferring the distinct property of scarless healing in early prenatal skin. However, further studies are required to fully elucidate the interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts in human prenatal skin and to conclusively establish their role in scarless healing.

Successful co-culture with immune cells has been demonstrated in some organoid systems,. We identified a crucial role of macrophages in vascular network remodelling after adding macrophages to hair-bearing iPS cell-derived SkOs. Not only is this important for our understanding of the diverse cellular interactions that mediate morphogenesis but it also has practical implications for in vitro models, which commonly fail to vascularize. Our study provides further insights into human HF formation and the origin of the CL, which seems to develop along the same trajectory as the ORS. These findings are consistent with recent results from mouse studies,, which showed that CL development occurs before hair matrix formation and there is greater transcriptional similarity of CL cells to ORS cells.

Our prenatal human skin atlas represents a valuable resource to explore genes that cause congenital hair and skin disorders and is freely accessible from our web portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-skin). We found that implicated genes are indeed expressed during prenatal skin development and HF differentiation, thereby supporting an in utero origin for these disorders. Our systematic prenatal skin–SkO comparison provides a blueprint to guide more faithful in vitro SkO generation, which can facilitate future studies of interactions with the microbiota, the pathogenesis of congenital skin disorders, and hair and skin engineering for therapeutic applications, including hair regeneration and skin transplant.