Prenatal skin interfaces with the amniotic fluid in a sterile environment. However, immune cells such as macrophages seed the skin as early as 6 PCW and express a range of pro-inflammatory genes, although genes relating to antigen presentation (for example, major histocompatibility complex class II (MHCII)) are only upregulated after 11 PCW. Decoupling of the expression of pro-inflammatory genes from MHCII genes before 11 PCW suggests that antigen presentation may not be a key function of human macrophages during early gestation. Together with evidence of their role in tissue homeostasis, and healing in mouse models,, this raises the question of whether macrophages contribute to human early skin morphogenesis.

The adult fibroblast gene expression profile was increased in WNT2+ and PEAR1+ prenatal fibroblasts, which were abundant in later gestation (Fig. 3a and Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7b). Genes associated with a pro-inflammatory fibroblast phenotype (APOE, IGFBP7 and ITM2A), were also upregulated during the transition from HOXC5+ fibroblasts into PEAR1+ fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7c). In addition to transcriptomics differences between fibroblast subsets enriched in early versus late gestation, we observed differences within the WNT2+ fibroblast population across gestation time (Extended Data Fig. 1d). Late gestation WNT2+ fibroblasts had upregulated genes related to extracellular matrix and collagen deposition (for example, COL1A1), whereas early WNT2+ fibroblasts had DEGs involved in cellular growth and differentiation (for example, SFRP1) (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 7d and Supplementary Tables 16–18).

The role of macrophages in promoting wound healing has been described in postnatal mouse skin and in adult human skin. In prenatal skin, macrophage subsets (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f) were predicted to co-locate with fibroblasts, neural cells and vascular cells in distinct tissue microenvironments in early gestation (Fig. 1d). Specifically, LYVE1+ macrophages co-located with WNT2+ fibroblasts (Fig. 3c–e) and were predicted to interact through platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and corresponding receptors (PDGFRα and PDGFRβ) expressed on fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8). Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart. Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1–IGF1R and GRN–EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1+ macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts.

This led us to infer a potential contribution of macrophages in scarless healing in prenatal skin. Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1+ macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2+ fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair,.

We further compared prenatal skin fibroblasts and macrophages to their counterparts in reindeer skin from antlers, which heal without scarring, and in back skin, which scars. Early-gestation human skin fibroblasts had a higher probability of correspondence to pro-regenerative reindeer fibroblasts, whereas in later gestation, the probability of matching to pro-fibrotic fibroblasts was higher (Extended Data Fig. 8d and Supplementary Table 19). Accordingly, several pro-regenerative genes (for example, CRABP1 and MDK) were downregulated in late gestation prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 8e and Supplementary Table 20). Notably, prenatal skin macrophages resembled ‘early macrophages’ that are enriched in reindeer antler skin but not macrophages in back skin (Extended Data Fig. 8f and Supplementary Table 21).

Collectively, our findings suggest that prenatal skin fibroblasts in early gestation downregulate genes involved in extracellular matrix formation, collagen deposition and inflammation, which may favour tissue regeneration over scarring. Based on our data and previous studies, we also posit a potential role for early skin macrophages in conferring the distinct property of scarless healing in early prenatal skin. However, further studies are required to fully elucidate the interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts in human prenatal skin and to conclusively establish their role in scarless healing.

TML macrophages were also predicted to co-locate with Schwann cells in prenatal skin (‘early neurovascular microenvironment’, ME1) (Figs. 1d and 3g) and expressed genes related to cell migration and neural development (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 22 and 23), which mirrored the functions of brain microglia and peripheral nerve-associated macrophages in mouse skin. TML macrophages were predicted to interact with Schwann cells, contributing to synapse formation and axon guidance (VEGFA–NRP1, VEGFA–NRP2, SEMA3C–NRP2 and SEMA3E–PLXND1) (Extended Data Fig. 8h and Supplementary Table 8). These findings suggest that prenatal skin macrophages may support the establishment of the skin peripheral nervous system during early gestation, as previously reported in mouse skin.

Macrophages have been implicated in angiogenesis during prenatal organ development and in the postnatal setting such as cancer-related angiogenesis,. Furthermore, macrophages expressing pro-angiogenic genes have been observed in diverse tissues during human development. Visium deconvolution analysis predicted co-location of prenatal skin macrophages with endothelial cells (‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’, ME1 and ME5) (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e). Gene ontology analysis showed that the four macrophage subsets (LYVE1+, MHCII+, TML and iron-recycling) expressed gene programs that drive angiogenesis (Supplementary Tables 23–26). Gene module expression profiles suggested that sprouting angiogenesis (growth of new vessels) was promoted by LYVE1+ and TML macrophages, blood vessel morphogenesis by LYVE1+ macrophages and endothelial cell chemotaxis by iron-recycling macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 8i and Supplementary Table 27).

Consistent with this finding, multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining showed LYVE1+ and TML macrophages in close proximity to endothelial cells (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Video 1). Predicted ligand–receptor interactions were consistent with reciprocal communication between macrophages and endothelial cells to support angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell migration (for example, CXCL8–ACKR1 and CCL8–ACKR1), (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 28).

Successful co-culture with immune cells has been demonstrated in some organoid systems,. We identified a crucial role of macrophages in vascular network remodelling after adding macrophages to hair-bearing iPS cell-derived SkOs. Not only is this important for our understanding of the diverse cellular interactions that mediate morphogenesis but it also has practical implications for in vitro models, which commonly fail to vascularize. Our study provides further insights into human HF formation and the origin of the CL, which seems to develop along the same trajectory as the ORS. These findings are consistent with recent results from mouse studies,, which showed that CL development occurs before hair matrix formation and there is greater transcriptional similarity of CL cells to ORS cells.