Macrophages co-located with endothelial and neural cells in ‘early and late neurovascular microenvironments’ (ME1 and ME5, respectively), whereas pre-dermal condensate (pre-Dc) cells co-located with dendritic and lymphoid cells based on correlation analyses (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e,f). These observations indicated that immune cells may occupy defined microanatomical niches where they have non-immune functions during early gestation.

Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell–cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration– (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells,.

We also assessed the expression profiles of genes previously reported in mouse HF formation. Similar signalling pathways were upregulated, including WNT and EDA for hair placode specification, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and noggin to inhibit hair formation in IFE cells, and PDGFA and TGFβ signalling for HF down growth (Extended Data Fig. 5f). Additionally, similar to fibroblast differentiation in mouse skin, pre-Dcs, the Dc and Dp and dermal fibroblasts in human prenatal skin also originated from a common fibroblast progenitor (HOXC5+ early fibroblast) (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 4d). However, cross-species data integration of human and mouse HF showed that human pre-Dc cells and the Dc aligned not only to their counterparts in mouse skin but also to fibroblasts in earlier stages of differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 5g–i and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11).

Collectively, our findings suggest that prenatal skin fibroblasts in early gestation downregulate genes involved in extracellular matrix formation, collagen deposition and inflammation, which may favour tissue regeneration over scarring. Based on our data and previous studies, we also posit a potential role for early skin macrophages in conferring the distinct property of scarless healing in early prenatal skin. However, further studies are required to fully elucidate the interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts in human prenatal skin and to conclusively establish their role in scarless healing.

Consistent with this finding, multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining showed LYVE1+ and TML macrophages in close proximity to endothelial cells (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Video 1). Predicted ligand–receptor interactions were consistent with reciprocal communication between macrophages and endothelial cells to support angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell migration (for example, CXCL8–ACKR1 and CCL8–ACKR1), (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 28).

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29). Inferred trajectory analysis showed that early endothelial cells in prenatal skin differentiated into either an arteriolar pathway (capillaries, capillary arterioles and arterioles) or venular pathway (postcapillary venules and venules), with expression of characteristic genes (for example, GJA5 for arteriolar and PLVAP for venular) (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a–c). Unlike SkO capillary arteriole cells, prenatal skin capillary arteriole cells could further differentiate into arterioles (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a).

Additional comparison with a human ES cell-derived and iPS cell-derived blood vessel organoid, which also lacked immune cells, further demonstrated the limited vasculature differentiation of this mesoderm-geared blood vessel organoid model (Extended Data Fig. 10d). This result confirms that immune cells are required to fully recapitulate in vivo endothelial cell development.

We next investigated additional mechanisms for failed expansion and differentiation of SkO endothelial cells. Expression of genes and gene modules related to blood flow and hypoxia were lower in SkO than in prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 10e,f and Supplementary Table 29). However, sprouting angiogenesis potential, assessed by scoring the ‘tip’ cell state, was increased in both SkO capillary arteriole cells and prenatal skin arteriole, capillary arteriole and capillary cells (Extended Data Fig. 10g,h). This suggests that despite strong expression of the sprouting angiogenesis gene signature, SkO capillary arteriole cells are unable to guide stalk cells for new blood vessel formation.

Anti-angiogenic genes (for example, WNT5A) and corresponding receptors were highly expressed in SkO, whereas pro-angiogenic genes (for example, CXCL8) were upregulated in prenatal skin and primarily expressed by macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 11a and Supplementary Tables 30–34). Although expression of vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF), VEGFA and VEGFB were increased in SkO cells, their receptors (KDR and FLT1) on SkO capillary arterioles were downregulated compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11b,c). These receptors are known downstream targets of GATA2, which has a key role in angiogenesis during development and regulates VEGF-induced endothelial cell migration and sprouting in vitro. Regulon analysis showed that GATA2 and related regulons (for example, NFATC1) were downregulated in SkO capillary arterioles (Extended Data Fig. 11d,e).

Several target genes of GATA2 and NFATC1 (for example, VWF), which were expressed across the venular trajectory pseudotime and are involved in endothelial cell differentiation, were downregulated in the SkO capillary arterioles compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11c,f). An orthogonal approach (NicheNet) identified macrophage-expressed VEGFA as one of the top upstream ligands that regulate differences in GATA2 expression between prenatal skin and SkO endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 11g and Supplementary Tables 35–37). These findings suggest that high VEGF production in the SkO cannot compensate for missing macrophage-related factors that drive GATA2 activity and downstream VEGF receptor expression (Fig. 4e).

We also observed a visibly more refined network and a trend towards reduced endothelial density in a two-dimensional angiogenesis assay of iPS cell-derived endothelial cells cultured with and without macrophages over 72 h (Extended Data Fig. 11i). Collectively, our findings demonstrate that interactions between macrophages and endothelial cells are required to support angiogenesis through blood vessel remodelling.

Successful co-culture with immune cells has been demonstrated in some organoid systems,. We identified a crucial role of macrophages in vascular network remodelling after adding macrophages to hair-bearing iPS cell-derived SkOs. Not only is this important for our understanding of the diverse cellular interactions that mediate morphogenesis but it also has practical implications for in vitro models, which commonly fail to vascularize. Our study provides further insights into human HF formation and the origin of the CL, which seems to develop along the same trajectory as the ORS. These findings are consistent with recent results from mouse studies,, which showed that CL development occurs before hair matrix formation and there is greater transcriptional similarity of CL cells to ORS cells.