Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart 56 . Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1-IGF1R and GRN-EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1 + macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts. 

We recently identified yolk-sac derived TREM2 + macrophages that share an expression profile (P2RY12, CX3CR1 and OLFML3) with microglia-like macrophages from other developing organs, such as the brain, prenatal skin and gonads 57,58 (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f). Prenatal skin TREM2 + microglia-like (TML) macrophages were highly correlated with embryonic brain microglia 57 (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b) and co-expressed immunomodulatory genes, including immune-inhibitory receptors (for example, CX3CR1) and regulators of IL-6 production (for example, SYT11) 59 (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 19-23). Downregulation of inflammation and IL-6 confers anti-fibrogenic properties in mouse skin transplants and in fetal wounds 60,61 . TML macrophages were predicted to co-locate with WNT2 + fibroblasts in early prenatal skin (6-8 PCW) (Fig. 3c,d) and WNT2 + fibroblasts had downregulated IL6 expression compared with adult fibroblasts (Fig. 3a). This led us to infer a potential contribution of macrophages in scarless healing in prenatal skin. Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1 + macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair 62,63 .

neural development (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 22 and 23), which mirrored the functions of brain microglia and peripheral nerve-associated macrophages in mouse skin 65 . TML macrophages were predicted to interact with Schwann cells, contributing to synapse formation and axon guidance (VEGFA-NRP1, VEGFA-NRP2, SEMA3C-NRP2 and SEMA3E-PLXND1) 66 (Extended Data Fig. 8h and Supplementary Table 8). These findings suggest that prenatal skin macrophages may support the establishment of the skin peripheral nervous system during early gestation, as previously reported in mouse skin 65 .

Macrophages have been implicated in angiogenesis during prenatal organ development and in the postnatal setting such as cancerrelated angiogenesis 67,68 . Furthermore, macrophages expressing pro-angiogenic genes have been observed in diverse tissues during human development 69 . Visium deconvolution analysis predicted co-location of prenatal skin macrophages with endothelial cells ('early and late neurovascular microenvironments', ME1 and ME5) (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e). Gene ontology analysis showed that the four macrophage subsets (LYVE1 + , MHCII + , TML and iron-recycling) expressed gene programs that drive angiogenesis (Supplementary Tables 23-26). Gene module expression profiles suggested that sprouting angiogenesis (growth of new vessels) was promoted by LYVE1 + and TML macrophages, blood vessel morphogenesis by LYVE1 + macrophages and endothelial cell chemotaxis by iron-recycling macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 8i and Supplementary Table 27). Consistent with this finding, multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining showed LYVE1 + and TML macrophages in close proximity to endothelial cells (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Video 1). Predicted ligandreceptor interactions were consistent with reciprocal communication between macrophages and endothelial cells to support angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell migration (for example, CXCL8-ACKR1 and CCL8-ACKR1) 10,70 (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 28). 

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29).

Macrophages were added to the SkOs and the co-culture was centrifuged at 100g for 6 min 1 acc, 0 dec. On day 3 of co-culture, the cells were transferred to a low-attachment 24-well plate, and Matrigel was diluted with fresh SkO maturation medium. On day 35 of co-culture (day 47 of SkO differentiation), the SkOs were fixed in a 2 ml tube with 4% paraformaldehyde (PFA) overnight for whole-mount serial staining (2 batches of differentiation, SkOs with macrophages n = 5, SkOs without macrophages n = 5). The co-culture was then permeabilized in blocking buffer (0.3% (v/v) Triton X-100, 1% (v/v) normal goat serum based on the antibodies and 1% BSA (v/v) dissolved in 1× PBS) for 8 h at room temperature on a shaker. Cells were then incubated overnight at 4 °C on a shaker (65 r.p.m.) with the first primary antibody, anti-CD45 (1:100, clone YAML501.4, ThermoFisher) for macrophages, for 48 h. The morning after, cells were washed and then incubated with the first secondary antibody overnight (goat anti-rat IgG, Alexa Fluor Plus 647, ThermoFisher). The morning after, SkOs were washed and incubated with the second primary antibody, anti-CD31 (1:100, clone JC70A, Dako) for endothelial cells for 48 h. The SkOs were then washed and incubated with the second secondary antibody (goat anti-mouse IgG1, Alexa Fluor 568, ThermoFisher) and DAPI overnight on a shaker. Cells were washed and placed in 50% glycerol for 30 min on a shaker at room temperature. Cells were then transferred to 70% glycerol overnight on a shaker at room temperature. The following morning, the co-culture was mounted and imaged using a custom 4-camera spinning disk confocal microscope.

genes before 11 PCW 5 suggests that antigen presentation may not be a key function of human macrophages during early gestation. Together with evidence of their role in tissue homeostasis 6,7 and healing in mouse models 8,9 , this raises the question of whether macrophages contribute to human early skin morphogenesis. 

Our current study provides a comprehensive multi-omics cell atlas of 7-17 PCW human prenatal skin. We profiled human prenatal skin using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), spatial transcriptomics and multiplex RNA in situ hybridization to decode the dynamic cellular and molecular changes across gestation that regulate skin and HF morphogenesis. We leveraged adult healthy skin and HF datasets 10,11 to compare and assess developmental-specific features that contribute to scarless skin healing and cues that guide de novo HF formation. We used a hair-bearing SkO model 1 to validate the role of macrophages in prenatal skin vascular network formation.

TML macrophages were also predicted to co-locate with Schwann cells in prenatal skin ('early neurovascular microenvironment', ME1) (Figs. 1d and 3g) and expressed genes related to cell migration and

3D volume rendering and segmentation was created using Imaris 10 software at the Boston Children's Hospital Cellular Imaging Core. For Supplementary Video 1, CD31 + vasculature and LYVE1 + macrophages were processed using the Imaris 'Surfaces' module. Co-localization of the CD31 and LYVE1 channels were processed using the 'Coloc' feature, generating a separate channel for overlapping signals. The parameters used in the Coloc feature depended on signal overlap and close contact of the CD31 and LYVE1 channels, leading to larger areas labelled as co-localized surfaces than the actual contact points of vessels and macrophages. Classification was based on estimated size and machine learning training. The following build parameters were used for CD31 + endothelial cells: area above 11.0 µm 2 ; for LYVE1 + macrophages: 'number of voxels Img=1' above 953; for co-localized surfaces: area above 1,004 µm 2 ; filter type 'overlapped volume ratio to surfaces surfaces=LYVE1' threshold=0.00976.