In addition to transcriptomics differences between fibroblast subsets enriched in early versus late gestation, we observed differences within the WNT2 + fibroblast population across gestation time (Extended Data Fig. 1d). Late gestation WNT2 + fibroblasts had upregulated genes related to extracellular matrix and collagen deposition (for example, COL1A1), whereas early WNT2 + fibroblasts had DEGs involved in cellular growth and differentiation (for example, SFRP1) (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 7d and Supplementary Tables 16-18). Notably, WNT2 + and PEAR1 + prenatal fibroblasts expressed several genes involved in cellular senescence (CDKN1A), cytokine pathways (for example, IL1R1) and collagen deposition (for example, POSTN) (Fig. 3a,b), which are highly expressed in pathogenic fibroblasts of fibrotic skin disorders 53 . These results provide further support for our finding of progressive acquisition of scar-promoting genes in later gestation, consistent with the clinical observation of scarring in third trimester skin 54 . 

The role of macrophages in promoting wound healing has been described in postnatal mouse skin and in adult human skin 55 . In prenatal skin, macrophage subsets (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f) were predicted to co-locate with fibroblasts, neural cells and vascular cells in distinct tissue microenvironments in early gestation (Fig. 1d). Specifically, LYVE1 + macrophages co-located with WNT2 + fibroblasts (Fig. 3c-e) and were predicted to interact through platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and corresponding receptors (PDGFRα and PDGFRβ) expressed on fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8). Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart 56 .

Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart 56 . Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1-IGF1R and GRN-EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1 + macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts. 

We recently identified yolk-sac derived TREM2 + macrophages that share an expression profile (P2RY12, CX3CR1 and OLFML3) with microglia-like macrophages from other developing organs, such as the brain, prenatal skin and gonads 57,58 (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f). Prenatal skin TREM2 + microglia-like (TML) macrophages were highly correlated with embryonic brain microglia 57 (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b) and co-expressed immunomodulatory genes, including immune-inhibitory receptors (for example, CX3CR1) and regulators of IL-6 production (for example, SYT11) 59 (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 19-23). Downregulation of inflammation and IL-6 confers anti-fibrogenic properties in mouse skin transplants and in fetal wounds 60,61 . TML macrophages were predicted to co-locate with WNT2 + fibroblasts in early prenatal skin (6-8 PCW) (Fig. 3c,d) and WNT2 + fibroblasts had downregulated IL6 expression compared with adult fibroblasts (Fig. 3a). This led us to infer a potential contribution of macrophages in scarless healing in prenatal skin. Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1 + macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair 62,63 .

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA + FOXD1 + SOX2 low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1 + SOX2 + ), which abuts the epithelial hair placode 26,28 . Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin 28,29 . Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP + , SOX2 + ) 26,28 (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h). 

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB + fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5 + early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2 + fibroblasts and PEAR1 + fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1 + macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair 62,63 . 

We further compared prenatal skin fibroblasts and macrophages to their counterparts in reindeer skin from antlers, which heal without scarring, and in back skin, which scars 64 . Early-gestation human skin fibroblasts had a higher probability of correspondence to pro-regenerative reindeer fibroblasts, whereas in later gestation, the probability of matching to pro-fibrotic fibroblasts was higher (Extended Data Fig. 8d and Supplementary Table 19). Accordingly, several pro-regenerative genes (for example, CRABP1 and MDK) were downregulated in late gestation prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 8e and Supplementary Table 20). Notably, prenatal skin macrophages resembled 'early macrophages' that are enriched in reindeer antler skin but not macrophages in back skin (Extended Data Fig. 8f and Supplementary Table 21). Using a scratch assay of SkO-derived fibroblasts cultured with or without iPS cell-derived macrophages, we demonstrated that scratch wound width closure was improved when fibroblasts were co-cultured with macrophages over 72 h (Extended Data Fig. 8g). 

Collectively, our findings suggest that prenatal skin fibroblasts in early gestation downregulate genes involved in extracellular matrix formation, collagen deposition and inflammation, which may favour tissue regeneration over scarring. Based on our data and previous studies, we also posit a potential role for early skin macrophages in conferring the distinct property of scarless healing in early prenatal skin. However, further studies are required to fully elucidate the interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts in human prenatal skin and to conclusively establish their role in scarless healing.

genes before 11 PCW 5 suggests that antigen presentation may not be a key function of human macrophages during early gestation. Together with evidence of their role in tissue homeostasis 6,7 and healing in mouse models 8,9 , this raises the question of whether macrophages contribute to human early skin morphogenesis. 

Our current study provides a comprehensive multi-omics cell atlas of 7-17 PCW human prenatal skin. We profiled human prenatal skin using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), spatial transcriptomics and multiplex RNA in situ hybridization to decode the dynamic cellular and molecular changes across gestation that regulate skin and HF morphogenesis. We leveraged adult healthy skin and HF datasets 10,11 to compare and assess developmental-specific features that contribute to scarless skin healing and cues that guide de novo HF formation. We used a hair-bearing SkO model 1 to validate the role of macrophages in prenatal skin vascular network formation.