Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation 1 . Within the dermal compartment, we observed HF-specialized fibroblasts, the dermal condensate (Dc) and dermal papilla (Dp), from 12 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c). 

We evaluated hair matrix cells, which arise from the epidermal placode, a prenatal-specific cell state absent in established adult HFs 20 (Extended Data Fig. 3d,e). Compared with adult HFs, prenatal skin matrix cells had increased expression of genes involved in chemotaxis, such as CXCL14, a chemokine previously reported to recruit regulatory T (T reg ) cells 21 , and in control of autoimmunity (CD24) 22 . This result highlighted the potential role of T reg cell accumulation and immune protection in the early stages of matrix differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 3f). T reg cells are known to localize around the HF in late second trimester (around 21 PCW) and in postnatal skin 23,24 . , adult healthy skin 10 and hair-bearing SkO 1 were integrated for comparison. Spatial experiments were carried out using RNAscope, immunofluorescence and Visium analyses. Findings of the study were functionally validated using a SkO co-culture. b, Uniform manifold approximation and projection (UMAP) visualization of the prenatal skin dataset with broad annotation of cell states, as denoted by colour and number in the legend. c, Milo beeswarm plot showing the differential abundance of neighbourhoods in prenatal skin across gestation time, annotated by broad cell labels. Red and blue neighbourhoods are significantly enriched in earlier or later gestation, respectively. Colour intensity denotes degree of significance. d, Dotplot showing spatial microenvironments (MEs). Cell type to microenvironment coefficients are normalized by cell type sums, and cell type to microenvironment assignment is shown by colour. ME5, which shows co-locating macrophages and endothelial cells, is highlighted (grey).

Human prenatal skin is populated by innate immune cells, including macrophages, but whether they act solely in immunity or have additional functions in morphogenesis is unclear. Here we assembled a comprehensive multi-omics reference atlas of prenatal human skin (7–17 post-conception weeks), combining single-cell and spatial transcriptomics data, to characterize the microanatomical tissue niches of the skin. This atlas revealed that crosstalk between non-immune and immune cells underpins the formation of hair follicles, is implicated in scarless wound healing and is crucial for skin angiogenesis. We systematically compared a hair-bearing skin organoid (SkO) model derived from human embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells to prenatal and adult skin1. The SkO model closely recapitulated in vivo skin epidermal and dermal cell types during hair follicle development and expression of genes implicated in the pathogenesis of genetic hair and skin disorders. However, the SkO model lacked immune cells and had markedly reduced endothelial cell heterogeneity and quantity. Our in vivo prenatal skin cell atlas indicated that macrophages and macrophage-derived growth factors have a role in driving endothelial development. Indeed, vascular network remodelling was enhanced following transfer of autologous macrophages derived from induced pluripotent stem cells into SkO cultures. Innate immune cells are therefore key players in skin morphogenesis beyond their conventional role in immunity, a function they achieve through crosstalk with non-immune cells. A comprehensive multi-omics reference atlas of prenatal human skin shows that innate immune cells crosstalk with non-immune cells to perform pivotal roles in skin morphogenesis, including the formation of hair follicles.

The precise mechanisms of de novo HF formation in human embryonic development are largely inferred from mouse studies 16 . Human studies have primarily focused on morphological descriptions during development 17 or cycling HFs in adult skin 18 . Our single-cell dataset captured the onset of HF formation, which enabled direct comparison between prenatal developing HFs and adult cycling HFs. 

Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14-15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a). 

Consistent with our histological observations, we identified HF cells from 14 PCW in our scRNA-seq data, which comprised placode, matrix (SHH + ), outer root sheath (ORS) (SLC26A7 + ), companion layer (CL), inner root sheath (IRS) and cuticle and cortex cells (cuticle/cortex; part of the inner layers of the HF) (Fig. 2a-c, Extended Data Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Table 6). In addition, we observed immature and mature interfollicular epidermal (IFE) cells. Immature IFE cells, including periderm, immature basal and immature suprabasal cells, were present from 7 PCW and decreased after 11 PCW, during the transition from embryonic to fetal skin (Fig. 2b). Mature basal (DPYSL2 + ) and suprabasal IFE cells increased after 11 PCW, whereas POSTN + basal cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3b). Sebaceous and apocrine gland cells, which mature after 16 PCW 19 , were not captured at these stages. Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation 1 .

To identify microenvironments of co-locating cell types, we used NMF. We first normalized the matrix of estimated cell type abundances by dividing it by per-spot total abundances. Resulting matrix Xn of dimensions n × c, where n is the total number of spots in the Visium slides and c is the number of cell types in the reference was decomposed as Xn = WZ, where W is a n × d matrix of latent factor values for each spot and Z is a d × c matrix representing the fraction of abundance of each cell type attributed to each latent factor. Here latent factors correspond to tissue microenvironments defined by a set of co-localized cell types. We use the NMF package for R 108 , setting the number of factors d = 10 and using the default algorithm 109 . NMF coefficients were normalized by a per-factor maximum. We ran NMF 100 times and constructed the coincidence matrix. Then we selected the best run based on the lower mean silhouette score calculated on the coincidence matrix. If more than one run had the minimal mean silhouette, we selected one with smaller deviance (as reported by NMF function). 

For cell type abundance correlation analysis, we used a per-spot normalized Xn matrix. Pearson correlation coefficient was calculated for each pair of cell types (all possible pairs computed) and each sample. For visualization of correlation analysis, selected cell pairs were plotted, guided by NMF results and which cell groups or categories formed microenvironments. For example, macrophages formed microenvironments with endothelial cells (ME1 and ME5), with neural cells (ME1 and ME5) and fibroblasts (ME1, ME4 and ME5) in Fig. 1d (Supplementary Table 40).

By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the SkO model recapitulated the different components of prenatal skin HF, interfollicular epidermis, neural cells and dermal fibroblasts, but immune cells were not represented and endothelial cells were markedly reduced.