Macrophages have been implicated in angiogenesis during prenatal organ development and in the postnatal setting such as cancerrelated angiogenesis 67,68 . Furthermore, macrophages expressing pro-angiogenic genes have been observed in diverse tissues during human development 69 . Visium deconvolution analysis predicted co-location of prenatal skin macrophages with endothelial cells ('early and late neurovascular microenvironments', ME1 and ME5) (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e). Gene ontology analysis showed that the four macrophage subsets (LYVE1 + , MHCII + , TML and iron-recycling) expressed gene programs that drive angiogenesis (Supplementary Tables 23-26). Gene module expression profiles suggested that sprouting angiogenesis (growth of new vessels) was promoted by LYVE1 + and TML macrophages, blood vessel morphogenesis by LYVE1 + macrophages and endothelial cell chemotaxis by iron-recycling macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 8i and Supplementary Table 27). Consistent with this finding, multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining showed LYVE1 + and TML macrophages in close proximity to endothelial cells (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Video 1). Predicted ligandreceptor interactions were consistent with reciprocal communication between macrophages and endothelial cells to support angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell migration (for example, CXCL8-ACKR1 and CCL8-ACKR1) 10,70 (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 28). 

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29).

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. (e) Gene expression plots for representative genes in prenatal skin (green) and SkO (blue) across pseudotime. Left column: the interpolated log1p transformed expression (y-axis) against pseudotime (x-axis). and percent of expressing cells (dot size) of marker genes 5 used to annotate macrophage subsets in prenatal skin. (g) Circos plot visualisation of representative significant (adjusted p-value <0.05, significance calculated in CellphoneDB using empirical shuffling and FDR-adjusted) predicted interactions between macrophages (LYVE1 + and TML macrophage) and co-localising WNT2 + fibroblasts in prenatal skin. Arrows represent directionality of interactions (ligand to receptor); connection width is proportional to the CellphoneDB mean value for each ligand-receptor pair. ASDC, Axl + Siglec6 + dendritic cells; DC, dendritic cells; LC, Langerhans cells. between embryonic immune cells (x-axis) and prenatal skin (y-axis) myeloid cell states for a logistic regression model trained on embryonic data 57 and projected onto prenatal skin myeloid cell subset. TML macrophage had the highest proportion prediction to Mac4 (embryonic brain microglia). (c) Gene set enrichment analysis results of over-expressed genes (wilcoxon, two-sided, Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted) in macrophage subsets (TML, Iron-recycling, LYVE1 + and MHCII + , macrophages). Each plot shows the top 10 enriched gene sets (using Gene Ontology Biological Process 2023 (left) and MSigDB Hallmark 2020 (right) databases). The x-axis shows the negative log

Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart 56 . Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1-IGF1R and GRN-EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1 + macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts. 

We recently identified yolk-sac derived TREM2 + macrophages that share an expression profile (P2RY12, CX3CR1 and OLFML3) with microglia-like macrophages from other developing organs, such as the brain, prenatal skin and gonads 57,58 (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f). Prenatal skin TREM2 + microglia-like (TML) macrophages were highly correlated with embryonic brain microglia 57 (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b) and co-expressed immunomodulatory genes, including immune-inhibitory receptors (for example, CX3CR1) and regulators of IL-6 production (for example, SYT11) 59 (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 19-23). Downregulation of inflammation and IL-6 confers anti-fibrogenic properties in mouse skin transplants and in fetal wounds 60,61 . TML macrophages were predicted to co-locate with WNT2 + fibroblasts in early prenatal skin (6-8 PCW) (Fig. 3c,d) and WNT2 + fibroblasts had downregulated IL6 expression compared with adult fibroblasts (Fig. 3a). This led us to infer a potential contribution of macrophages in scarless healing in prenatal skin. Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1 + macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair 62,63 .

3D volume rendering and segmentation was created using Imaris 10 software at the Boston Children's Hospital Cellular Imaging Core. For Supplementary Video 1, CD31 + vasculature and LYVE1 + macrophages were processed using the Imaris 'Surfaces' module. Co-localization of the CD31 and LYVE1 channels were processed using the 'Coloc' feature, generating a separate channel for overlapping signals. The parameters used in the Coloc feature depended on signal overlap and close contact of the CD31 and LYVE1 channels, leading to larger areas labelled as co-localized surfaces than the actual contact points of vessels and macrophages. Classification was based on estimated size and machine learning training. The following build parameters were used for CD31 + endothelial cells: area above 11.0 µm 2 ; for LYVE1 + macrophages: 'number of voxels Img=1' above 953; for co-localized surfaces: area above 1,004 µm 2 ; filter type 'overlapped volume ratio to surfaces surfaces=LYVE1' threshold=0.00976.

Image analysis of multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining was performed on independent biological and/or technical replicates for each experiment: n = 5 biological replicates for RNAscope slides with FOXP3, SHH, SLC26A7 and NDP probes (Fig. 2c); n = 1 biological replicate with 4 technical replicates for RNAscope slides with ACKR3, CXCL12, PDGFD and SERPINB7 probes (Fig. 2h); n = 3 biological replicates with 2 technical replicates for immunofluorescence slides with anti-FOXP3, anti-SOX2 and anti-KRT14 (Extended Data Fig. 3h); n = 1 biological replicate with n = 2 technical replicates for immunofluorescence slides with anti-LYVE1, anti-CD45 and anti-VIM (Fig. 3e); n = 3 biological replicates for RNAscope slides with CDH5, CD68, P2RY12 and ELAVL3 probes (Fig. 4a); n = 1 biological replicate with 4 technical replicates for immunofluorescence slides with anti-CD45, anti-LYVE1 and anti-CD31 (Fig. 4a); n = 15 biological replicates with a minimum of n = 2 technical replicates for prenatal skin immunofluorescence slides with each of the following antibodies: anti-KRT1, anti-KRT14, anti-plectin, anti-BP180, anti-laminin-332 and anti-type VII collagen (Extended Data Fig. 6e); n = 3 biological replicates for prenatal skin whole-mount immunofluorescence with anti-CD31 and anti-LYVE1 (Fig. 4a); whole-mount immunostaining of SkO co-culture with and without macrophages was performed on n = 5 SkOs without macrophages and n = 5 SkOs with macrophages (Fig. 4f); immunostaining of cryosections of SkOs co-cultured with macrophages was performed on n = 2 SkOs (Fig. 4h).