Macrophages have been implicated in angiogenesis during prenatal organ development and in the postnatal setting such as cancerrelated angiogenesis 67,68 . Furthermore, macrophages expressing pro-angiogenic genes have been observed in diverse tissues during human development 69 . Visium deconvolution analysis predicted co-location of prenatal skin macrophages with endothelial cells ('early and late neurovascular microenvironments', ME1 and ME5) (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e). Gene ontology analysis showed that the four macrophage subsets (LYVE1 + , MHCII + , TML and iron-recycling) expressed gene programs that drive angiogenesis (Supplementary Tables 23-26). Gene module expression profiles suggested that sprouting angiogenesis (growth of new vessels) was promoted by LYVE1 + and TML macrophages, blood vessel morphogenesis by LYVE1 + macrophages and endothelial cell chemotaxis by iron-recycling macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 8i and Supplementary Table 27). Consistent with this finding, multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining showed LYVE1 + and TML macrophages in close proximity to endothelial cells (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Video 1). Predicted ligandreceptor interactions were consistent with reciprocal communication between macrophages and endothelial cells to support angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell migration (for example, CXCL8-ACKR1 and CCL8-ACKR1) 10,70 (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 28). 

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29).

Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart 56 . Our identification of additional growth factor interactions (IGF1-IGF1R and GRN-EGFR) (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8) suggests that LYVE1 + macrophages play a part in the maintenance of prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts. 

We recently identified yolk-sac derived TREM2 + macrophages that share an expression profile (P2RY12, CX3CR1 and OLFML3) with microglia-like macrophages from other developing organs, such as the brain, prenatal skin and gonads 57,58 (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f). Prenatal skin TREM2 + microglia-like (TML) macrophages were highly correlated with embryonic brain microglia 57 (Extended Data Fig. 8a,b) and co-expressed immunomodulatory genes, including immune-inhibitory receptors (for example, CX3CR1) and regulators of IL-6 production (for example, SYT11) 59 (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 19-23). Downregulation of inflammation and IL-6 confers anti-fibrogenic properties in mouse skin transplants and in fetal wounds 60,61 . TML macrophages were predicted to co-locate with WNT2 + fibroblasts in early prenatal skin (6-8 PCW) (Fig. 3c,d) and WNT2 + fibroblasts had downregulated IL6 expression compared with adult fibroblasts (Fig. 3a). This led us to infer a potential contribution of macrophages in scarless healing in prenatal skin. Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1 + macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair 62,63 .

Further information on research design is available in the Nature Portfolio Reporting Summary linked to this article. (e) Gene expression plots for representative genes in prenatal skin (green) and SkO (blue) across pseudotime. Left column: the interpolated log1p transformed expression (y-axis) against pseudotime (x-axis). and percent of expressing cells (dot size) of marker genes 5 used to annotate macrophage subsets in prenatal skin. (g) Circos plot visualisation of representative significant (adjusted p-value <0.05, significance calculated in CellphoneDB using empirical shuffling and FDR-adjusted) predicted interactions between macrophages (LYVE1 + and TML macrophage) and co-localising WNT2 + fibroblasts in prenatal skin. Arrows represent directionality of interactions (ligand to receptor); connection width is proportional to the CellphoneDB mean value for each ligand-receptor pair. ASDC, Axl + Siglec6 + dendritic cells; DC, dendritic cells; LC, Langerhans cells. between embryonic immune cells (x-axis) and prenatal skin (y-axis) myeloid cell states for a logistic regression model trained on embryonic data 57 and projected onto prenatal skin myeloid cell subset. TML macrophage had the highest proportion prediction to Mac4 (embryonic brain microglia). (c) Gene set enrichment analysis results of over-expressed genes (wilcoxon, two-sided, Benjamini-Hochberg adjusted) in macrophage subsets (TML, Iron-recycling, LYVE1 + and MHCII + , macrophages). Each plot shows the top 10 enriched gene sets (using Gene Ontology Biological Process 2023 (left) and MSigDB Hallmark 2020 (right) databases). The x-axis shows the negative log

Additionally, GAS6, expressed by TML macrophages and LYVE1 + macrophages, was predicted to interact with AXL receptors on WNT2 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8), and these interactions can induce immunosuppression and tissue repair 62,63 . 

We further compared prenatal skin fibroblasts and macrophages to their counterparts in reindeer skin from antlers, which heal without scarring, and in back skin, which scars 64 . Early-gestation human skin fibroblasts had a higher probability of correspondence to pro-regenerative reindeer fibroblasts, whereas in later gestation, the probability of matching to pro-fibrotic fibroblasts was higher (Extended Data Fig. 8d and Supplementary Table 19). Accordingly, several pro-regenerative genes (for example, CRABP1 and MDK) were downregulated in late gestation prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 8e and Supplementary Table 20). Notably, prenatal skin macrophages resembled 'early macrophages' that are enriched in reindeer antler skin but not macrophages in back skin (Extended Data Fig. 8f and Supplementary Table 21). Using a scratch assay of SkO-derived fibroblasts cultured with or without iPS cell-derived macrophages, we demonstrated that scratch wound width closure was improved when fibroblasts were co-cultured with macrophages over 72 h (Extended Data Fig. 8g). 

Collectively, our findings suggest that prenatal skin fibroblasts in early gestation downregulate genes involved in extracellular matrix formation, collagen deposition and inflammation, which may favour tissue regeneration over scarring. Based on our data and previous studies, we also posit a potential role for early skin macrophages in conferring the distinct property of scarless healing in early prenatal skin. However, further studies are required to fully elucidate the interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts in human prenatal skin and to conclusively establish their role in scarless healing.

neural development (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 22 and 23), which mirrored the functions of brain microglia and peripheral nerve-associated macrophages in mouse skin 65 . TML macrophages were predicted to interact with Schwann cells, contributing to synapse formation and axon guidance (VEGFA-NRP1, VEGFA-NRP2, SEMA3C-NRP2 and SEMA3E-PLXND1) 66 (Extended Data Fig. 8h and Supplementary Table 8). These findings suggest that prenatal skin macrophages may support the establishment of the skin peripheral nervous system during early gestation, as previously reported in mouse skin 65 .