TFs that were mismatched across pseudotime or drove misalignment in early and late pseudotime (for example, HOXA7 and BARX1) were largely attributable to the different origins of dermal cells between prenatal skin (trunk and limb) and SkO (neural crest differentiation) 40 (Extended Data Fig. 5d,e and Supplementary Table 9). 

We also assessed the expression profiles of genes previously reported in mouse HF formation. Similar signalling pathways were upregulated, including WNT and EDA for hair placode specification, bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) and noggin to inhibit hair formation in IFE cells, and PDGFA and TGFβ signalling for HF down growth 26 (Extended Data Fig. 5f). Additionally, similar to fibroblast differentiation in mouse skin, pre-Dcs, the Dc and Dp and dermal fibroblasts in human prenatal skin also originated from a common fibroblast progenitor (HOXC5 + early fibroblast) (Fig. 2e and Extended Data Fig. 4d). However, cross-species data integration of human and mouse HF 41 showed that human pre-Dc cells and the Dc aligned not only to their counterparts in mouse skin but also to fibroblasts in earlier stages of differentiation (Extended Data Fig. 5g-i and Supplementary Tables 10 and 11). This result suggests that for corresponding cell types, HF fibroblasts are in a more differentiated state in mouse compared to human prenatal skin. Additionally, dermal fibroblast differentiation into histologically defined subsets (papillary and reticular) has been reported to occur early in mice (about embryonic day 12.5) 42 . Our human prenatal skin fibroblasts did not significantly express papillary fibroblast markers (for example, COL13A1) 43 (Extended Data Fig. 5j), which suggested that the distinction between papillary and reticular fibroblasts emerges after 17 PCW. These distinctions between human and mouse skin may be attributed to organismal differences in gestation lengths and tempo of differentiation.

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA + FOXD1 + SOX2 low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1 + SOX2 + ), which abuts the epithelial hair placode 26,28 . Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin 28,29 . Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP + , SOX2 + ) 26,28 (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h). 

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB + fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5 + early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2 + fibroblasts and PEAR1 + fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

Prenatal human skin is able to heal without scarring but loses this capacity after 24 PCW 50 . Scars result from aggregation of collagen produced by dermal fibroblasts and failure of the overlying epidermis to completely regenerate 51 . To identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms that may endow early prenatal skin with scarless healing properties, we investigated the temporal changes in composition and transcriptional profile of the dermal fibroblast subsets (Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7a). We first compared prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts with healthy adult skin fibroblasts 10 . All adult fibroblast subsets expressed high levels of inflammatory cytokines and receptors (for example, IL6 and IL1RA) and genes involved in antigen presentation (for example, HLA-A), innate immune and inflammatory responses (for example, CD55 and PTGES) and cellular senescence (CDKN1A) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13-15). By contrast, prenatal skin fibroblasts had upregulated genes involved in immune suppression (CD200), regulation of inflammation (for example, RAMP2) and tissue regeneration (MDK) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13-15). 

The adult fibroblast gene expression profile was increased in WNT2 + and PEAR1 + prenatal fibroblasts, which were abundant in later gestation (Fig. 3a and Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7b). Genes associated with a pro-inflammatory fibroblast phenotype (APOE, IGFBP7 and ITM2A) 43,52 were also upregulated during the transition from HOXC5 + fibroblasts into PEAR1 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7c). In addition to transcriptomics differences between fibroblast subsets enriched in early versus late gestation, we observed differences within the WNT2 + fibroblast population across gestation time (Extended Data Fig. 1d).

To compare gene expression of FRZB in fibroblasts across developing organs, a scRNAseq stromal dataset from multiple developing organs 5 (available from the Human Developmental Cell Atlas (https://developmental.cellatlas. io/fetal-immune)) was used, which also includes our prenatal skin scRNA-seq data. The data were normalized to 1 × 10 4 counts per cell (scanpy.pp.normalize_total), log1p transformed (scanpy.pp.log1p) and subsetted to fibroblast cell types only to plot expression of FRZB by organ across gestation time. 

Trajectory analysis. The CellRank package 96 (v.1.5.2) was used to define cell transition matrices, lineage drivers and rank fate probabilities of terminal state transitions across annotated lineages in a combined embedding of prenatal skin and SkO for keratinocytes and fibroblasts and in the prenatal skin for endothelial cells. Using pp.moments (n_pcs=10, n_neighbours=30) from the scVelo package (v.0.3.0), first order kinetics matrices were imputed. Using the palantir kernel and the velocity kernel in CellRank 96 , a mixed probability transition matrix was computed with the palantir kernel weighing 70% and the velocity kernel 30%. Schur matrix Eigen decomposition (n_components=25, method='brandts') identified macrostates, terminal stages and initial stages. Lineage drivers were then computed for each state using compute_lineage_drivers from CellRank and pseudotime and latent time computed in scVelo (Supplementary Table 7). 

In vivo-in vitro trajectory alignment analysis. We used Dynamic Programming-based alignment to evaluate agreement between the single-cell trajectories of prenatal skin and SkO fibroblasts, which describe the in vivo and in vitro differentiation lineages from HOXC5 + early fibroblasts to the Dp.

By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the SkO model recapitulated the different components of prenatal skin HF, interfollicular epidermis, neural cells and dermal fibroblasts, but immune cells were not represented and endothelial cells were markedly reduced.