Prenatal human skin is able to heal without scarring but loses this capacity after 24 PCW 50 . Scars result from aggregation of collagen produced by dermal fibroblasts and failure of the overlying epidermis to completely regenerate 51 . To identify the cellular and molecular mechanisms that may endow early prenatal skin with scarless healing properties, we investigated the temporal changes in composition and transcriptional profile of the dermal fibroblast subsets (Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7a). We first compared prenatal skin dermal fibroblasts with healthy adult skin fibroblasts 10 . All adult fibroblast subsets expressed high levels of inflammatory cytokines and receptors (for example, IL6 and IL1RA) and genes involved in antigen presentation (for example, HLA-A), innate immune and inflammatory responses (for example, CD55 and PTGES) and cellular senescence (CDKN1A) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13-15). By contrast, prenatal skin fibroblasts had upregulated genes involved in immune suppression (CD200), regulation of inflammation (for example, RAMP2) and tissue regeneration (MDK) (Fig. 3a and Supplementary Tables 13-15). 

The adult fibroblast gene expression profile was increased in WNT2 + and PEAR1 + prenatal fibroblasts, which were abundant in later gestation (Fig. 3a and Extended Data Figs. 3c and 7b). Genes associated with a pro-inflammatory fibroblast phenotype (APOE, IGFBP7 and ITM2A) 43,52 were also upregulated during the transition from HOXC5 + fibroblasts into PEAR1 + fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7c). In addition to transcriptomics differences between fibroblast subsets enriched in early versus late gestation, we observed differences within the WNT2 + fibroblast population across gestation time (Extended Data Fig. 1d).

We delineated the dermal cell types involved in crosstalk with epidermal cells during HF development and captured the precursors of the human Dc (Extended Data Figs. 2b and 3c). In mice, transitional PDGFRA + FOXD1 + SOX2 low fibroblasts termed pre-Dc cells aggregate to form the Dc (FOXD1 + SOX2 + ), which abuts the epithelial hair placode 26,28 . Using orthologous marker genes, we annotated pre-Dc cells and the Dc in human prenatal skin 28,29 . Following HF invagination, the Dc becomes encapsulated at its base as the Dp (NDP + , SOX2 + ) 26,28 (Fig. 2c and Extended Data Fig. 3h). 

To infer the origin of pre-Dc cells and the Dc and Dp, we performed trajectory and pseudotime analysis of integrated prenatal skin and SkO fibroblast clusters (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Fig. 4d and Supplementary Table 7). We excluded FRZB + fibroblasts, which were primarily observed in one sample from the earliest gestation stage (7 PCW) (Extended Data Fig. 3c). Although rare in prenatal skin, FRZB-expressing fibroblasts were present in several other developing organs (Extended Data Fig. 4e). Inferred trajectory analysis predicted that HOXC5 + early fibroblasts (located in the upper dermis (Fig. 2f) and abundant before 11 PCW (Extended Data Fig. 3c)) differentiated along two paths: the first (hair fibroblast trajectory) formed hair-specialized fibroblasts (pre-Dc cells, the Dc and Dp) and the second (dermal fibroblast trajectory) formed WNT2 + fibroblasts and PEAR1 + fibroblasts (abundant after 11 PCW) (Fig. 2e, Extended Data Figs. 3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7).

In addition to transcriptomics differences between fibroblast subsets enriched in early versus late gestation, we observed differences within the WNT2 + fibroblast population across gestation time (Extended Data Fig. 1d). Late gestation WNT2 + fibroblasts had upregulated genes related to extracellular matrix and collagen deposition (for example, COL1A1), whereas early WNT2 + fibroblasts had DEGs involved in cellular growth and differentiation (for example, SFRP1) (Fig. 3b, Extended Data Fig. 7d and Supplementary Tables 16-18). Notably, WNT2 + and PEAR1 + prenatal fibroblasts expressed several genes involved in cellular senescence (CDKN1A), cytokine pathways (for example, IL1R1) and collagen deposition (for example, POSTN) (Fig. 3a,b), which are highly expressed in pathogenic fibroblasts of fibrotic skin disorders 53 . These results provide further support for our finding of progressive acquisition of scar-promoting genes in later gestation, consistent with the clinical observation of scarring in third trimester skin 54 . 

The role of macrophages in promoting wound healing has been described in postnatal mouse skin and in adult human skin 55 . In prenatal skin, macrophage subsets (Extended Data Fig. 7e,f) were predicted to co-locate with fibroblasts, neural cells and vascular cells in distinct tissue microenvironments in early gestation (Fig. 1d). Specifically, LYVE1 + macrophages co-located with WNT2 + fibroblasts (Fig. 3c-e) and were predicted to interact through platelet-derived growth factors (PDGFs) and corresponding receptors (PDGFRα and PDGFRβ) expressed on fibroblasts (Extended Data Fig. 7g and Supplementary Table 8). Interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts maintain tissue homeostasis in diverse organs such as spleen, peritoneum and heart 56 .

3c and 4d and Supplementary Table 7). Along the hair fibroblast pseudotime, genes involved in regulation of cell adhesion (ADAMST1), cell-cell contacts (CLDN11) and directed migration (CXCL12) were upregulated as pre-Dc cells migrated towards the epidermis, which indicated a process of collective migration [30][31][32] (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Genes implicated in collagen fibril formation and cell adhesion (COL6A3, MFAP4 and PTK7) were expressed as the pre-Dc cells aggregated into the Dc (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7). Formation of the Dp was characterized by genes (RSPO3 and WNT5A) (Extended Data Fig. 4f and Supplementary Table 7) that coordinate the differentiation of adjacent hair matrix cells 33,34 . 

We explored the mesenchymal-epithelial interactions that instruct early HF formation. Receptor-ligand analysis predicted interactions between CXCL12 expressed by pre-Dc cells (Extended Data Fig. 4g,h) with ACKR3 on epidermal basal cells (Fig. 2g and Supplementary Table 8). RNAscope analysis confirmed that these two genes co-located (Fig. 2h). This result suggests that CXCL12 probably interacts with ACKR3 to mediate the migration of pre-Dc cells 31,35 . Notably, lymphoid tissue inducer and ILC3 cells were also predicted to co-locate and interact with pre-Dc cells through ligand-receptor signals implicated in the regulation of cellular adhesion and migration (CXCL12-CXCR4 and CXCL12-DPP4) 35,36  The Dc, for which formation is accompanied by invagination of the placode, expressed FAM3C and EFNB1, which were, respectively, predicted to interact with LAMP1 or CXADR and EPHB6 on the placode, and have been reported to promote cell migration and invasion 37,38 (Fig. 2g, Extended Data Fig. 5b and Supplementary Table 8).

genes before 11 PCW 5 suggests that antigen presentation may not be a key function of human macrophages during early gestation. Together with evidence of their role in tissue homeostasis 6,7 and healing in mouse models 8,9 , this raises the question of whether macrophages contribute to human early skin morphogenesis. 

Our current study provides a comprehensive multi-omics cell atlas of 7-17 PCW human prenatal skin. We profiled human prenatal skin using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), spatial transcriptomics and multiplex RNA in situ hybridization to decode the dynamic cellular and molecular changes across gestation that regulate skin and HF morphogenesis. We leveraged adult healthy skin and HF datasets 10,11 to compare and assess developmental-specific features that contribute to scarless skin healing and cues that guide de novo HF formation. We used a hair-bearing SkO model 1 to validate the role of macrophages in prenatal skin vascular network formation.