ME5, which shows co-locating macrophages and endothelial cells, is highlighted (grey). e, UMAP visualizations of the integrated prenatal skin, adult skin 10 and SkO 1 datasets, coloured by broad cell lineages. ASDC, Axl + Siglec6 + dendritic cells; DC, dendritic cells; HSC, haematopoietic stem cells; LC, Langerhans cells; LE, lymphatic endothelium; LTi, lymphoid tissue inducer cell; MEMP, megakaryocyte-erythroidmast cell progenitor; NK cell, natural killer cells; pDC, plasmacytoid dendritic cells. The images in a were created using BioRender (https://biorender.com). Inferred trajectory and pseudotime analysis of epidermal cells in the integrated prenatal skin and SkO data predicted the differentiation of POSTN + basal cells into two paths: ORS/CL trajectory, comprising DPYSL2 + basal cells, ORS and CL; and IRS trajectory, involving placode, matrix, cuticle/cortex and IRS (Fig. 2d, Extended Data Fig. 4a and Supplementary Table 7). Along the ORS/CL trajectory, we identified new genes upregulated by DPYSL2 + basal cells, such as AGR2, and previously reported genes related to ORS differentiation (BARX2 and SOX9) 25,26 (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). AGR2 was downregulated along the IRS trajectory, whereas known matrix markers such as SHH and WNT10B 25,26 were upregulated (Extended Data Fig. 4b,c and Supplementary Table 7). Loss of AGR2, which functions in the assembly of cysteine-rich receptors enriched in HFs, promotes cell migration 27 . Our findings suggest that increased cellular migration in POSTN + basal cells may be involved in placode specification and dermal invagination.

A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2 + basal, POSTN + basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g). The same analysis was performed to obtain the top 10 interactions in SkO HFs (Extended Data Fig. 5c), defining early/late to match corresponding cell states as in prenatal skin. The top 10 interactions identified in prenatal skin HFs were also plotted within the SkO data to highlight similarities and differences between the two (Fig. 2g). 

Comparison with adult fibroblasts. Integrated scRNA-seq data from prenatal skin and adult healthy skin (with original annotations) 10 was subsetted to the cell group of interest (fibroblasts). DEGs between the adult and prenatal skin fibroblasts were derived using the Wilcoxon rank-sum test implementation in scanpy and adjusted for multiple testing using the Benjamini-Hochberg method (scanpy.tl.rank_genes_ groups, method = "wilcoxon", corr_method = "benjamini-hochberg"). Gene set enrichment analysis was performed using the top 1,000 genes in each group ranked by scores (Supplementary Table 13) and the implementation of the Enrichr workflow 102 in the Python package GSEApy (https://gseapy.readthedocs.io/; v.0.10.7) with Gene Ontology Biological Process (2021) as the query database (Supplementary Tables 14, 15). A selected list of genes was plotted to highlight differences between prenatal and adult skin fibroblasts. 

Gene set enrichment analysis.

The subsampled dataset were analysed separately using the permutation-based method to establish significance (P value cut-off = 0.05). For the analysis by early/late gestation, the prenatal skin scRNA-seq dataset was first split into early (≤11 PCW) and late (≥12 PCW) gestation datasets, which were then subsampled (no more than 200 cells per cell type) and individually analysed (P value cut-off = 0.05). A summary output file was created for each analysis run, compiling the interactions for each cell pair (P < 0.05) and adjusting P values for multiple testing (FDR set at 0.05) (Supplementary Tables 8  and 28). Circos plots (Circlize package (v.0.4.15) 101 ) were used for downstream visualizations of selected significant (adjusted P value < 0.05) interactions between co-locating cell types for interactions found in all subsampled analyses. 

To explore inferred interactions between macrophage subsets and endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 9a), we aggregated the interactions predicted for each macrophage subset and the different subtypes of endothelial cells (early endothelial cells, arterioles, capillary arterioles, capillaries, postcapillary venules and venules) by averaging the means and using the minimum of the adjusted P values as previously described 5 . A curated list of aggregated interactions were plotted for visualization using ggplot2 (v. 3.3.6). A similar approach was adopted for assessing interactions between HF dermal and epidermal cells in prenatal skin: for each subset of hair follicle dermal cells, the interactions with early epithelial cells (≤11 PCW; immature basal) or late epithelial cells (≥12 PCW; DPYSL2 + basal, POSTN + basal, placode, matrix, ORS, CL, IRS, cuticle/cortex) were aggregated, and the top 10 interactions per cell pair visualized using a heatmap (Fig. 2g).

The precise mechanisms of de novo HF formation in human embryonic development are largely inferred from mouse studies 16 . Human studies have primarily focused on morphological descriptions during development 17 or cycling HFs in adult skin 18 . Our single-cell dataset captured the onset of HF formation, which enabled direct comparison between prenatal developing HFs and adult cycling HFs. 

Prenatal skin up to 8 PCW consisted of a layer of epidermal cells overlying the dermal stroma, with the periderm seen sloughing from 11 PCW (Fig. 2a). At 14-15 PCW, budding of basal cells (hair placode and germ cells) and elongation of HFs (hair pegs) were observed (Fig. 2a). At 17 PCW, hair pegs were evident beneath a stratified epidermal layer (Fig. 2a). 

Consistent with our histological observations, we identified HF cells from 14 PCW in our scRNA-seq data, which comprised placode, matrix (SHH + ), outer root sheath (ORS) (SLC26A7 + ), companion layer (CL), inner root sheath (IRS) and cuticle and cortex cells (cuticle/cortex; part of the inner layers of the HF) (Fig. 2a-c, Extended Data Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Table 6). In addition, we observed immature and mature interfollicular epidermal (IFE) cells. Immature IFE cells, including periderm, immature basal and immature suprabasal cells, were present from 7 PCW and decreased after 11 PCW, during the transition from embryonic to fetal skin (Fig. 2b). Mature basal (DPYSL2 + ) and suprabasal IFE cells increased after 11 PCW, whereas POSTN + basal cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3b). Sebaceous and apocrine gland cells, which mature after 16 PCW 19 , were not captured at these stages. Accordingly, sebocyte progenitors are present from day 133 of SkO differentiation 1 .

By contrast, accelerated differentiation was observed in keratinocytes and melanocytes, with alignment to adult cell states seen as early as 4 weeks of SkO culture (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5). Notably, the SkO model recapitulated the different components of prenatal skin HF, interfollicular epidermis, neural cells and dermal fibroblasts, but immune cells were not represented and endothelial cells were markedly reduced.