Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29). Inferred trajectory analysis showed that early endothelial cells in prenatal skin differentiated into either an arteriolar pathway (capillaries, capillary arterioles and arterioles) or venular pathway (postcapillary venules and venules), with expression of characteristic genes (for example, GJA5 for arteriolar and PLVAP for venular) (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a-c). Unlike SkO capillary arteriole cells, prenatal skin capillary arteriole cells could further differentiate into arterioles (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a). Additional comparison with a human ES cell-derived and iPS cell-derived blood vessel organoid 71 , which also lacked immune cells, further demonstrated the limited vasculature differentiation of this mesoderm-geared blood vessel organoid model (Extended Data Fig. 10d). This result confirms that immune cells are required to fully recapitulate in vivo endothelial cell development. 

We next investigated additional mechanisms for failed expansion and differentiation of SkO endothelial cells. Expression of genes and gene modules related to blood flow and hypoxia were lower in SkO than in prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 10e,f and Supplementary Table 29). However, sprouting angiogenesis potential, assessed by scoring the 'tip' cell state, was increased in both SkO capillary arteriole cells and prenatal skin arteriole, capillary arteriole and capillary cells (Extended Data Fig. 10g,h). This suggests that despite strong expression of the sprouting angiogenesis gene signature, SkO capillary arteriole cells are unable to guide stalk cells for new blood vessel formation.

This suggests that despite strong expression of the sprouting angiogenesis gene signature, SkO capillary arteriole cells are unable to guide stalk cells for new blood vessel formation. 

Anti-angiogenic genes (for example, WNT5A) and corresponding receptors were highly expressed in SkO, whereas pro-angiogenic genes (for example, CXCL8) were upregulated in prenatal skin and primarily expressed by macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 11a and Supplementary Tables 30-34). Although expression of vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF), VEGFA and VEGFB were increased in SkO cells, their receptors (KDR and FLT1) on SkO capillary arterioles were downregulated compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11b,c). These receptors are known downstream targets of GATA2, which has a key role in angiogenesis during development and regulates VEGF-induced endothelial cell migration and sprouting in vitro 72 . Regulon analysis showed that GATA2 and related regulons (for example, NFATC1) were downregulated in SkO capillary arterioles (Extended Data Fig. 11d,e). Several target genes of GATA2 and NFATC1 (for example, VWF), which were expressed across the venular trajectory pseudotime and are involved in endothelial cell differentiation 73 , were downregulated in the SkO capillary arterioles compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11c,f). An orthogonal approach (NicheNet 74 ) identified macrophage-expressed VEGFA as one of the top upstream ligands that regulate differences in GATA2 expression between prenatal skin and SkO endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 11g and Supplementary Tables 35-37). These findings suggest that high VEGF production in the SkO cannot compensate for missing macrophage-related factors that drive GATA2 activity and downstream VEGF receptor expression (Fig. 4e).

Gene module scoring was performed using the sc.tl.score_genes function in scanpy. For angiogenesis gene modules, pre-defined gene sets from the Gene Ontology Biological Process Database (2021) in Enrichr libraries 103 were used (downloaded from Enrichr (https://maayanlab.cloud/Enrichr/#libraries)). For endothelial cell modules, gene sets defining tip, stalk, arteriole, venule and lymphatic, capillary (Extended Data Fig. 10g,h) were derived from published literature 73,104,105 , and for the hypoxia score, a hallmark hypoxia gene list was used. The list of genes for each gene module is provided in Supplementary Tables 27 and 29. The score for each module is the average expression of the gene set provided subtracted with the average expression of a reference set of genes. The reference set comprised 100 genes (ctrl_size=100), which were randomly sampled from all genes in the dataset (default gene_pool) with 25 expression level bins (n_bins=25) used for sampling. For angiogenesis modules, the mean module scores were computed for each cell type of interest (for example, LYVE1 + macrophage) and z score normalized for visualization. 

Gene regulatory network analysis. The PySCENIC package 106 (v.0.11.2) and pipeline were used to identify TFs and their target genes in the combined prenatal skin and SkO scRNA-seq datasets. The ranking database (hg38 refseq-r80 500bp_up_and_100bp_down_tss.mc9nr.feather), motif annotation database (motifs-v9-nr.hgnc-m0.001-o0.0.tbl) were downloaded from the Aert's laboratory GitHub page. The tool was run 10 times, with a dataset comprising at most 1,000 cells per cell type × tissue pair (where tissue is prenatal skin or SkO).

Macrophages have been implicated in angiogenesis during prenatal organ development and in the postnatal setting such as cancerrelated angiogenesis 67,68 . Furthermore, macrophages expressing pro-angiogenic genes have been observed in diverse tissues during human development 69 . Visium deconvolution analysis predicted co-location of prenatal skin macrophages with endothelial cells ('early and late neurovascular microenvironments', ME1 and ME5) (Fig. 1d and Extended Data Fig. 1e). Gene ontology analysis showed that the four macrophage subsets (LYVE1 + , MHCII + , TML and iron-recycling) expressed gene programs that drive angiogenesis (Supplementary Tables 23-26). Gene module expression profiles suggested that sprouting angiogenesis (growth of new vessels) was promoted by LYVE1 + and TML macrophages, blood vessel morphogenesis by LYVE1 + macrophages and endothelial cell chemotaxis by iron-recycling macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 8i and Supplementary Table 27). Consistent with this finding, multiplex RNAscope and immunofluorescence staining showed LYVE1 + and TML macrophages in close proximity to endothelial cells (Fig. 4a and Supplementary Video 1). Predicted ligandreceptor interactions were consistent with reciprocal communication between macrophages and endothelial cells to support angiogenesis, chemotaxis and cell migration (for example, CXCL8-ACKR1 and CCL8-ACKR1) 10,70 (Extended Data Fig. 9a and Supplementary Table 28). 

Our data suggested that macrophages contribute to prenatal skin angiogenesis. Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29).

Image analysis of endothelial cell culture. To quantify the area covered by endothelial cells in the 2D angiogenesis assay with and without macrophages, phase-contrast images of the wells at 24, 48 and 72 h of culture were analysed using the Fiji distribution of the ImageJ software (v.2.14.0) 83 . The endothelial area was estimated by measuring the area of the wells covered by all cells (that is, endothelial cells alone or endothelial cells with macrophages). To obtain the endothelial density (in per cent) the area covered by cells was measured in pixels after segmentation using intensity thresholding and normalized to the total imaged area (constant, 2,115,570 pixels).