Consistent with this hypothesis, we observed fewer and less heterogeneous endothelial cells in the immunodeficient SkOs compared to prenatal skin, despite the formation of well-developed HFs, epidermis and neural cells (Fig. 4b,c, Extended Data Fig. 9b and Supplementary Table 29). Inferred trajectory analysis showed that early endothelial cells in prenatal skin differentiated into either an arteriolar pathway (capillaries, capillary arterioles and arterioles) or venular pathway (postcapillary venules and venules), with expression of characteristic genes (for example, GJA5 for arteriolar and PLVAP for venular) (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a-c). Unlike SkO capillary arteriole cells, prenatal skin capillary arteriole cells could further differentiate into arterioles (Fig. 4d and Extended Data Fig. 10a). Additional comparison with a human ES cell-derived and iPS cell-derived blood vessel organoid 71 , which also lacked immune cells, further demonstrated the limited vasculature differentiation of this mesoderm-geared blood vessel organoid model (Extended Data Fig. 10d). This result confirms that immune cells are required to fully recapitulate in vivo endothelial cell development. 

We next investigated additional mechanisms for failed expansion and differentiation of SkO endothelial cells. Expression of genes and gene modules related to blood flow and hypoxia were lower in SkO than in prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 10e,f and Supplementary Table 29). However, sprouting angiogenesis potential, assessed by scoring the 'tip' cell state, was increased in both SkO capillary arteriole cells and prenatal skin arteriole, capillary arteriole and capillary cells (Extended Data Fig. 10g,h). This suggests that despite strong expression of the sprouting angiogenesis gene signature, SkO capillary arteriole cells are unable to guide stalk cells for new blood vessel formation.

This suggests that despite strong expression of the sprouting angiogenesis gene signature, SkO capillary arteriole cells are unable to guide stalk cells for new blood vessel formation. 

Anti-angiogenic genes (for example, WNT5A) and corresponding receptors were highly expressed in SkO, whereas pro-angiogenic genes (for example, CXCL8) were upregulated in prenatal skin and primarily expressed by macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 11a and Supplementary Tables 30-34). Although expression of vascular endothelial growth factors (VEGF), VEGFA and VEGFB were increased in SkO cells, their receptors (KDR and FLT1) on SkO capillary arterioles were downregulated compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11b,c). These receptors are known downstream targets of GATA2, which has a key role in angiogenesis during development and regulates VEGF-induced endothelial cell migration and sprouting in vitro 72 . Regulon analysis showed that GATA2 and related regulons (for example, NFATC1) were downregulated in SkO capillary arterioles (Extended Data Fig. 11d,e). Several target genes of GATA2 and NFATC1 (for example, VWF), which were expressed across the venular trajectory pseudotime and are involved in endothelial cell differentiation 73 , were downregulated in the SkO capillary arterioles compared to prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 11c,f). An orthogonal approach (NicheNet 74 ) identified macrophage-expressed VEGFA as one of the top upstream ligands that regulate differences in GATA2 expression between prenatal skin and SkO endothelial cells (Extended Data Fig. 11g and Supplementary Tables 35-37). These findings suggest that high VEGF production in the SkO cannot compensate for missing macrophage-related factors that drive GATA2 activity and downstream VEGF receptor expression (Fig. 4e).

Image analysis of endothelial cell culture. To quantify the area covered by endothelial cells in the 2D angiogenesis assay with and without macrophages, phase-contrast images of the wells at 24, 48 and 72 h of culture were analysed using the Fiji distribution of the ImageJ software (v.2.14.0) 83 . The endothelial area was estimated by measuring the area of the wells covered by all cells (that is, endothelial cells alone or endothelial cells with macrophages). To obtain the endothelial density (in per cent) the area covered by cells was measured in pixels after segmentation using intensity thresholding and normalized to the total imaged area (constant, 2,115,570 pixels).

Human developmental tissue samples used for this study were obtained from the MRC-Wellcome Trust-funded Human Developmental Biology Resource (http://www.hdbr.org) with approval from the Newcastle and North Tyneside NHS Health Authority Joint Ethics Committee (08/H0906/21+5) and East of England-Cambridge Central Research Ethics Committee (NHS REC 96/085). Prenatal skin for immunofluorescence imaging of proteins causing congenital skin disorders were obtained with approval from the Guy's and St Thomas' Hospital Trust Ethics Committee. For samples used for 3D rendering in the Koehler Laboratory, fetal tissue specimens were obtained from the Birth Defects Research Laboratory at the University of Washington (UW) with approval from the UW institutional review board Committee, and the study was performed in accordance with ethical and legal guidelines of the Boston Children's Hospital institutional review board. All samples were collected following either elective termination of pregnancy or miscarriages, with informed written consent, following all relevant rules and regulations. 

Tissues were processed into single-cell suspensions immediately after receipt for single-cell transcriptomic profiling. Tissue was first transferred to a sterile 10 mm 2 tissue culture dish and cut in <1 mm 3 segments using a scalpel. It was then digested with type IV collagenase (final concentration of 1.6 mg ml -1 ; Worthington) in RPMI (Sigma-Aldrich) supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated FBS (Gibco) at 37 °C for 30 min with intermittent agitation. Digested tissue was then passed through a 100 µm cell strainer. For 2 samples (F220, F221), 500 µl of 0.25% trypsin (Sigma-Aldrich) was further added to any remaining unfiltered tissue and incubated at room temperature for 5 min. Cells were collected by centrifugation (500g for 5 min at 4 °C). Cells were treated with 1× RBC lysis buffer (eBioscience) for 5 min at room temperature and washed once with flow buffer (PBS containing 5% (v/v) FBS and 2 mM EDTA) before cell counting and antibody staining.

These findings suggest that high VEGF production in the SkO cannot compensate for missing macrophage-related factors that drive GATA2 activity and downstream VEGF receptor expression (Fig. 4e). 

We next introduced autologous iPS cell-derived macrophages (Extended Data Fig. 11h) in the early stages of SkO differentiation and assessed the endothelial network on day 35 of co-culture. Macrophages co-localized with blood vessels even after 5 weeks of culture (Fig. 4f-h). A more elaborate and organized vascular network was seen in SkOs co-cultured with macrophages compared with control SkOs without macrophages (Fig. 4f,g). Control SkOs displayed a mesh-like aggregation of endothelial cells, quantified as a higher density of endothelial cell coverage of SkO volume, which was absent in SkOs co-cultured with macrophages (Fig. 4f,g). This disorganized vascular mesh may have prevented the isolation of endothelial cells for scRNA-seq analysis (Fig. 4b). We also observed a visibly more refined network and a trend towards reduced endothelial density in a two-dimensional angiogenesis assay of iPS cell-derived endothelial cells cultured with and without macrophages over 72 h (Extended Data Fig. 11i). Collectively, our findings demonstrate that interactions between macrophages and endothelial cells are required to support angiogenesis through blood vessel remodelling.