Human skin organogenesis begins after gastrulation from two primary germ layers. The epidermis, the most superficial layer of the skin, melanocytes and neural cells arise from the ectoderm. The dermis, which is separated from the epidermis by the basement membrane and contains endothelial and mural cells, derives from the mesoderm (apart from facial and cranial skin, where it arises from ectoderm-derived neural crest cells). The skin appendages, which include hair follicles (HFs) and sebaceous glands, form in a cephalocaudal direction. Prenatal HFs start forming between 11 and 14 post-conception weeks (PCW), initiated by interactions between epidermal placodes (focal sites of epidermal layer thickening) and dermal condensates (aggregates of dermal fibroblasts), whereas sebaceous glands develop from around 16 PCW.

There is, however, a paucity of information about the precise cellular composition of human prenatal skin over these developmental periods and whether cells interact in functional microanatomical niches that support skin morphogenesis.

Our current study provides a comprehensive multi-omics cell atlas of 7–17 PCW human prenatal skin. We profiled human prenatal skin using single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq), spatial transcriptomics and multiplex RNA in situ hybridization to decode the dynamic cellular and molecular changes across gestation that regulate skin and HF morphogenesis. We leveraged adult healthy skin and HF datasets, to compare and assess developmental-specific features that contribute to scarless skin healing and cues that guide de novo HF formation. We used a hair-bearing SkO model to validate the role of macrophages in prenatal skin vascular network formation.

We next integrated and compared human prenatal and adult skin data with the SkO model. The aim was to determine the extent to which the SkO model recapitulates human skin differentiation at a molecular level and its potential utility to functionally assess the role of immune cells in skin morphogenesis (Fig. 1e and Extended Data Fig. 2a,b). Broadly, cell states were conserved among SkO, prenatal and adult skin, but SkO cell states matched prenatal skin more closely than adult skin across culture duration (Extended Data Fig. 2c,d and Supplementary Table 5). However, the tempo of differentiation varied across the distinct skin cell lineages. Even after 19 weeks of culture, fibroblasts, mural and Schwann cells had a low probability of correspondence to adult skin cell states (Extended Data Fig. 2d and Supplementary Table 5).

Consistent with our histological observations, we identified HF cells from 14 PCW in our scRNA-seq data, which comprised placode, matrix (SHH+), outer root sheath (ORS) (SLC26A7+), companion layer (CL), inner root sheath (IRS) and cuticle and cortex cells (cuticle/cortex; part of the inner layers of the HF) (Fig. 2a–c, Extended Data Fig. 3a,b and Supplementary Table 6). In addition, we observed immature and mature interfollicular epidermal (IFE) cells. Immature IFE cells, including periderm, immature basal and immature suprabasal cells, were present from 7 PCW and decreased after 11 PCW, during the transition from embryonic to fetal skin (Fig. 2b). Mature basal (DPYSL2+) and suprabasal IFE cells increased after 11 PCW, whereas POSTN+ basal cells were present throughout gestation (Fig. 2b and Extended Data Fig. 3b). Sebaceous and apocrine gland cells, which mature after 16 PCW, were not captured at these stages.

This result suggests that for corresponding cell types, HF fibroblasts are in a more differentiated state in mouse compared to human prenatal skin. Additionally, dermal fibroblast differentiation into histologically defined subsets (papillary and reticular) has been reported to occur early in mice (about embryonic day 12.5). Our human prenatal skin fibroblasts did not significantly express papillary fibroblast markers (for example, COL13A1) (Extended Data Fig. 5j), which suggested that the distinction between papillary and reticular fibroblasts emerges after 17 PCW. These distinctions between human and mouse skin may be attributed to organismal differences in gestation lengths and tempo of differentiation. Cellular differentiation occurs at a quicker pace in mice, whereas the longer gestation period in humans permits more advanced maturation to take place in utero.

We further compared prenatal skin fibroblasts and macrophages to their counterparts in reindeer skin from antlers, which heal without scarring, and in back skin, which scars. Early-gestation human skin fibroblasts had a higher probability of correspondence to pro-regenerative reindeer fibroblasts, whereas in later gestation, the probability of matching to pro-fibrotic fibroblasts was higher (Extended Data Fig. 8d and Supplementary Table 19). Accordingly, several pro-regenerative genes (for example, CRABP1 and MDK) were downregulated in late gestation prenatal skin (Extended Data Fig. 8e and Supplementary Table 20). Notably, prenatal skin macrophages resembled ‘early macrophages’ that are enriched in reindeer antler skin but not macrophages in back skin (Extended Data Fig. 8f and Supplementary Table 21).

Collectively, our findings suggest that prenatal skin fibroblasts in early gestation downregulate genes involved in extracellular matrix formation, collagen deposition and inflammation, which may favour tissue regeneration over scarring. Based on our data and previous studies, we also posit a potential role for early skin macrophages in conferring the distinct property of scarless healing in early prenatal skin. However, further studies are required to fully elucidate the interactions between macrophages and fibroblasts in human prenatal skin and to conclusively establish their role in scarless healing.

TML macrophages were also predicted to co-locate with Schwann cells in prenatal skin (‘early neurovascular microenvironment’, ME1) (Figs. 1d and 3g) and expressed genes related to cell migration and neural development (Fig. 3f, Extended Data Fig. 8c and Supplementary Tables 22 and 23), which mirrored the functions of brain microglia and peripheral nerve-associated macrophages in mouse skin. TML macrophages were predicted to interact with Schwann cells, contributing to synapse formation and axon guidance (VEGFA–NRP1, VEGFA–NRP2, SEMA3C–NRP2 and SEMA3E–PLXND1) (Extended Data Fig. 8h and Supplementary Table 8). These findings suggest that prenatal skin macrophages may support the establishment of the skin peripheral nervous system during early gestation, as previously reported in mouse skin.

In this study, we characterized the dynamic composition of human prenatal skin during the early stages of de novo HF formation and highlighted the crucial skin immune and non-immune crosstalk that contributes to skin morphogenesis, results that are in line with emerging evidence in animal and human studies,. Our atlas indicated that macrophages contribute to scarless skin repair, fibroblast homeostasis and neurovascular development. This is in part contributed to by yolk-sac derived TML macrophages, which suggests that these cells have broader functions outside the central nervous system in early gestation. The presence of TML macrophages has previously been identified in several prenatal organs,,.

Our prenatal human skin atlas represents a valuable resource to explore genes that cause congenital hair and skin disorders and is freely accessible from our web portal (https://developmental.cellatlas.io/fetal-skin). We found that implicated genes are indeed expressed during prenatal skin development and HF differentiation, thereby supporting an in utero origin for these disorders. Our systematic prenatal skin–SkO comparison provides a blueprint to guide more faithful in vitro SkO generation, which can facilitate future studies of interactions with the microbiota, the pathogenesis of congenital skin disorders, and hair and skin engineering for therapeutic applications, including hair regeneration and skin transplant.